# 13/14 December 2021 FAIR4RS Call

_[Your time conversion](https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?msg=FAIR4RS+May+committee+meeting&iso=20210510T20&p1=1440)_



* **Chair**: Neil Chue Hong
* **Notes**: Carlos Martinez
* **Attendees**: Neil Chue Hong, Michelle Barker, Morane Grunepeter, Daniel S. Katz, Fotis Psomopoulos, Paula Andrea Martinez, Tom Honeyman, Qian Zhang, Leyla Jael Castro
* **Apologies**: Jen (old invite so 1hr late)

_Chairing rota_: Neil Chue Hong (December 2021), Leyla Jael Castro (Jan 2022), Jen Harrow (Feb 2022), Morane Gruenpeter (March 2022), Paula Andrea Martinez (April 2022), Daniel S. Katz (May 2022), Fotis Psomopoulos (June 2022), Michelle (July 2022), Carlos Martinez (August 2022?)

**_Previous chair takes notes at next meeting_**


## Quick links



* [FAIR4RS WG](https://www.rd-alliance.org/groups/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg) (RDA) &[ Case statement](https://www.rd-alliance.org/group/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg/case-statement/fair-research-software-wg-case-statement) (RDA)
* [FAIR4RS](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS) (GitHub)
* [Steering committee meeting agendas and minutes](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/tree/master/meetings/2020) (GitHub)


## Agenda



1. Welcome to all new attendees
2. Review action items from[ previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2021/2021-10-11-Minutes.md#list-of-actions)
3. Progress on finalisation of RDA recommendation
4. Progress on [submission](https://docs.google.com/document/d/16KrE62qjTt-4AXpT-c2OhVDp25eP7-h_mokhelVLM60/edit) to Scientific Data
    1. Current version of principles needs to be submitted before we can submit
5. Update subgroups
    1. Subgroup 5 - Adoption guidelines
    2. Subgroup 6 - Adoption support
    3. Subgroup 7 - Governance
6. Past and future activities
7. AOB


## Action items

From the [November meeting](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1MjXGY1olcv1TG_416YYrLrrbEuIZVqLpxFYDfLZzZGE/edit#heading=h.j7k7ef3xu2pn)



1. **ACTION Neil**: upload subgroup 4 report to Zenodo (DOI has been reserved) carry on report
2. **ACTION Morane**: upload subgroup 3 report to Zenodo (DOI has been reserved) carry report - Done
3. **ACTION**: Carlos and Michelle to ensure someone’s doing each task needed for Scientific Data submission, will review where volunteers are still needed on 12 Nov - Done
4. **ACTION:** Carlos to liaise with Leyla to see if she wishes to lead a submission - Done
5. **ACTION:** Carlos will upload the November minutes to GH - Done


## Notes

Items for this meeting



1. Welcome to all new attendees
    1. No new attendees
2. Review action items from [previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2021/2021-11-08-Minutes.md)
    1. Neil: No update to deposit, but I will have it done by the end of 2021!
    2. Morane: Report has been deposited and can be cited with: Gruenpeter, Morane, Katz, Daniel S., Lamprecht, Anna-Lena, Honeyman, Tom, Garijo, Daniel, Struck, Alexander, Niehues, Anna, Martinez, Paula Andrea, Jael Castro, Leyla, Rabemanantsoa, Tovo, Chue Hong, Neil P., Martinez-Ortiz, Carlos, Sesink, Laurents, Liffers, Matthias, Fouilloux, Anne Claire, Erdmann, Chris, Peroni, Silvio, Martinez Lavanchy, Paula, Todorov, Ilian, & Sinha, Manodeep. (2021). Defining Research Software: a controversial discussion (Version 1). Zenodo. [https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5504016](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5504016)
    3. Confirm whether submission to RSE track SE conference in Germany went ahead ([https://www.se-2022.de/rse-22-call-for-contributions/](https://www.se-2022.de/rse-22-call-for-contributions/))
3. Progress on finalisation of RDA recommendation
    1. Michelle explains why it might be useful to publish FAIR4RS principles on a separate table.
        1. Should the table contain only the principles or also the explanation text?
        2. Dan is in favour of not splitting the principles from the rest.
        3. Current version of the paper (Scientific Data submission) focuses mostly on the impact
        4. Tom argues for splitting the principles, because that makes the RDA output into an adoptable item. RDA might not accept the Scientific Data submission as a recommendation).
        5. Michelle explains: the suggestion is to split RDA recommendation into two items: the actual principles and the “history”. This is independent of including the principles as a table in the Scientific Data article.
        6. Neil also mentions the fair-software domain is “parked” and waiting to be used, depending on what we want to do.
        7. If the objective is publishing the principles on a high profile journal, we should have the Scientific Data publication as the canonical reference.
        8. The context (consultation process, etc) could be a different type of RDA output, that would not be an issue.
        9. Leyla asks for clarification: do supporting outputs require community consultation (same as recommendations) – answer is yes. The difference is recommendations require adopters (which supporting outputs don’t).
        10. Neil summarises: General agreement different options serve different purposes. We have not yet reached agreement on what has priority (RDA outputs or Scientific Data article). Spanner in the works: there is still some work to be done on the explanatory text.
        11. What are the benefits of RDA vs. Scientific Data paper? Different audience: RDA aims at infrastructure providers and allows for governance to exist. Publishing at Scientific Data aims at a wider audience.
        12. [Final decision] There are really 3 outputs:
            1. The Principles themselves (or with explanatory text)
            2. Provenance / context / history
            3. Scientific Data paper (advertising purposes)
        13. There will be a need for another round of consultation, but hopefully since we’ve gone through consultation rounds, there should not be too many changes. We may respond to comments, but as long as these comments do not require substantial change to the document, then response to comments is sufficient.
        14. [Action Neil]: Split the document on the two RDA documents.
        15. Check the author list
4. Progress on [submission](https://docs.google.com/document/d/16KrE62qjTt-4AXpT-c2OhVDp25eP7-h_mokhelVLM60/edit) to Scientific Data
5. Update subgroups
    1. Subgroup 5 - Adoption guidelines
        1. Started writing document on adoption guidelines, but there are substantial parts not written yet, so there are some delays.
    2. Subgroup 6 - Adoption support
        1. Not as much progress in last couple of weeks - nothing to report this month
        2. We will try to get things moving again asap.
    3. Subgroup 7 - Governance
        1. Not a lot to report – agreement on the format of the output will help move this group forward.
6. Past and future activities
    1. [FAIReScience workshop](https://researchsoft.github.io/FAIReScience/) & output (We said: "From the talks, questions and discussions, we plan a white paper to be written after the workshop, with workshop speakers and attendees as authors.")
        1. Dan has not been able to work on it. Since this is not time critical, it can be discussed next week and/or over email.
    2. Are we meeting in January? We do not have any more scheduled meetings. Also how long do we want to host meetings? We are officially finishing on March 8th.
        1. 10th of January is the next meeting
7. AOB
    1. Morane will not be available in March for the chairing meeting (can exchange with February or April)
    2. [Action Carlos] Minutes on github


## Next Meeting

**Next Meeting**: Monday, January 10th 20:00 UTC (**_chair_**: Leyla Jael Castro, **_note taker_**: Neil Chue Hong). For invitation see events on the[ FAIR4RS WG events](https://www.rd-alliance.org/node/69317/events)


## List of actions

_(as copied from the minutes above)_

1. **[Action Neil]**: Split the document on the two RDA documents.
2. **[Action Carlos]:** Minutes on github
