# 08/09 November 2021 FAIR4RS Call

_[Your time conversion](https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?msg=FAIR4RS+May+committee+meeting&iso=20210510T20&p1=1440)_



* **Chair**: Carlos Martinez
* **Notes**: Michelle Barker
* **Attendees**: Paula Andrea Martinez, Daniel S. Katz, Malin Sandström, Morane Gruenpeter, Viviana Letizia, Susanna-Assunta Sansone, Neil Chue Hong, Carlos Martinez, Allen Lee, Qian Zhang, Michelle Barker, Tom Honeyman, Esther Plomp, Tovo Rabemanantsoa
* **Apologies**: Leyla Jael Castro, Jen Harrow, Fotis Psomopoulos (BioHackathon)

_Chairing rota_: Neil Chue Hong (December 2021), Leyla Jael Castro (Jan 2022), Jen Harrow (Feb 2022), Morane Gruenpeter (March 2022), Paula Andrea Martinez (April 2022), Daniel S. Katz (May 2022), Fotis Psomopoulos (June 2022), Michelle (July 2022), Carlos Martinez (August 2022?)

**_Previous chair takes notes at next meeting_**


## Quick links



* [FAIR4RS WG](https://www.rd-alliance.org/groups/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg) (RDA) & [Case statement](https://www.rd-alliance.org/group/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg/case-statement/fair-research-software-wg-case-statement) (RDA)
* [FAIR4RS](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS) (GitHub)
* [Steering committee meeting agendas and minutes](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/tree/master/meetings/2020) (GitHub)


## Agenda



1. Welcome to all new attendees
2. Review action items from [previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2021/2021-10-11-Minutes.md#list-of-actions)
3. Progress on [submission](https://docs.google.com/document/d/16KrE62qjTt-4AXpT-c2OhVDp25eP7-h_mokhelVLM60/edit) to Scientific Data
   1. Discuss now or electronically
   2. Table of suggested deadlines (Thank Michelle!)
4. Update subgroups
   1. Subgroup 5 - Adoption guidelines
   2. Subgroup 6 - Adoption support
   3. Subgroup 7 - Governance
5. Debrief about RDA VP18 (Leyla, Paula, Michelle, Morane, Carlos)
   1. FAIR4RS sessions
   2. Related sessions
6. Suggest a submission to [RSE track SE conference](https://www.se-2022.de/rse-22-call-for-contributions/) (Leyla)
7. Past and Future activities
8. AOB


## Action items

From the [October meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2021/2021-10-11-Minutes.md#list-of-actions)



1. **ACTION Neil**: upload subgroup 4 report to Zenodo (DOI has been reserved) carry on report
2. **ACTION Morane**: upload subgroup 3 report to Zenodo (DOI has been reserved) carry report
3. **ACTION Dan**: will go through the [Draft document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/16KrE62qjTt-4AXpT-c2OhVDp25eP7-h_mokhelVLM60/edit), move sections around to meet the outline below, and identify gaps / areas that need work. - Done
4. **ACTION Carlos, Leyla, Paula and Michelle**: to coordinate the agenda and presentation for the FAIR4RS session at the VP18 - Done
5. **ACTION Paula**: will upload the October minutes to GH - Done
6. **ACTION Paula**: add invitation to RDA events and posts - Done


## Notes

Items for this meeting



1. Welcome to all new attendees  
   1. Viviana Letizia - managing editor for SoftwareX journal
2. Review action items from [previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2021/2021-10-11-Minutes.md#list-of-actions)  
   1. Items 1-2 to carry over  
   2. **ACTION**: **Morane, Paula and Dan** to meet to upload subgroup 3 report  
3. Progress on [submission](https://docs.google.com/document/d/16KrE62qjTt-4AXpT-c2OhVDp25eP7-h_mokhelVLM60/edit) to Scientific Data  
   1. The table describes content that needs to be added to the text, and we need to finish by the end of the next week (Nov 20). Then we have a week or two to review internally and find suggested reviewers. We are targeting Dec 4th. No limitation on the number of authors from Scientific Data.  
   2. **ACTION**: **Carlos and Michelle** to ensure someone’s doing each task needed for Scientific Data submission, will review where volunteers are still needed on 12 Nov.  
   3. How much explanatory text do we need to add? The FAIR guiding principles were a different type (Comment) this one is an Article.   
   4. Ensure that we show the context and contrast with the FAIR guiding principles.  
   5. Suggestion to make this somewhat like a checklist to make it easy for people to adopt. But this is at odds with how FAIR guiding principles were drafted, as a future vision. Suggest maintaining this approach for principles and in explanatory text provide more information to support adoption through examples of FAIR in practice in action (for a small script, larger application, etc.). This may need more discussion from the author group.  
4. Update subgroups  
   1. Subgroup 5 - Adoption guidelines  
      1. Collecting resources and reviewing them to identify which parts of the principles they support.  
      2. Will write a report summarising available resources and what is being developed.  
   2. Subgroup 6 - Adoption support  
      1. ~10 initiatives identified as early adopters, now trying to identify what their implementation looks like, what could help them, what are their challenges  
      2. Will write a report on different adoption strategies being utilised.  
      3. **ACTION** **Carlos**: Contact Allen Lee and Dan to hear from adoption stories from code repositories (https://www.comses.net/)  
   3. Subgroup 7 - Governance  
      1. Members have been introducing themselves and articulating that success could look like  
      2. Members have been commenting on tasks of this subgroup, which will lead to a report showing how WGs could work further on this, and in what timelines.  
5. Debrief about RDA VP18 (Leyla, Paula, Michelle, Morane, Carlos)
   1. FAIR4RS sessions: Session 1 (Breakout 2) 34 registered attendees (7 DE, 6 US, 6 FR, 4 NL, 3 UK, 2 CA, 1 AU, 1 BE, 1 DK, 1 FI, 1 IT, 1 SW). Session 2 (Breakout 6) 18 registered attendees (6 US, 5 AU, 3 FR, 3 UK, 1 SW). 50 people in total (2 repeated sessions) 28 are already members of the WG.
   2. Discussion in the two sessions differed due to attendees. Session 2 included some support for workshops in other languages, given the success of the RDA France session in French.
   3. Proposal to do workshops on how to implement the FAIR4RS
6. Past and Future activities
   1. Related sessions - SSCIG is tomorrow, which will reference FAIR4RS principles
   2. Suggestion to create a toolkit to help people run workshops on adopting the principles. ARDC are running an internal workshop. Anna-Lena Lamprecht has also received a NWO grant on this.
   3. Suggest a submission to [RSE track SE conference](https://www.se-2022.de/rse-22-call-for-contributions/) (Leyla)
      1. This is a German software engineering conference with a research software engineering track
      2. Submission by 12 Nov
      3. **ACTION**: Carlos to liaise with Leyla to see if she wishes to lead a submission
7. AOB
   1. **ACTION** **Carlos**: will upload the November minutes to Github.
   2. **ACTION** **Paula**: add invitation to RDA events and posts


## Next Meeting

**Next Meeting**: Monday, December 13th 20:00 UTC (**_chair_**: Neil Chue Hong, **_note taker_**: Carlos Martinez). For invitation see events on the[ FAIR4RS WG events](https://www.rd-alliance.org/node/69317/events)


## List of actions

_(as copied from the minutes above)_



1. **ACTION**: Morane, Paula and Dan to meet to upload subgroup 3 report
2. **ACTION**: Carlos and Michelle to ensure someone’s doing each task needed for Scientific Data submission, will review where volunteers are still needed on 12 Nov
3. **ACTION:** Carlos to liaise with Leyla to see if she wishes to lead a submission
4. **ACTION:** Carlos will upload the November minutes to GH
