# 12/13 July 2021 FAIR4RS Call

[_Your time conversion_](https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?msg=FAIR4RS+July+committee+meeting&amp;iso=20210712T20&amp;p1=1440&amp;ah=1)

- **Chair** : Paula A Martinez
- **Notes** : Fotis Psomopoulos
- **Attendees** : Neil Chue Hong, Jen Harrow, Carlos Martinez, Leyla Garcia, Andreas Czerniak, Qian Zhang, Michelle Barker, Paula A Martinez, Fotis Psomopoulos
- **Apologies** : Daniel S. Katz, Morane Gruenpeter

_Chairing rota_: Daniel S. Katz (August 2021), Fotis Psomopoulos (September 2021), Michelle Barker (October 2021), Carlos Martinez (November 2021), Neil Chue Hong (December 2021), Leyla Jael Garcia Castro (Jan 2022), Jen Harrow (Feb 2022), Morane Gruenpeter (March 2022), Paula Andrea Martinez (April 2022)

_**Previous chair takes notes at next meeting**_

## Quick links

- [FAIR4RS WG](https://www.rd-alliance.org/groups/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg) (RDA) &amp; [Case statement](https://www.rd-alliance.org/group/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg/case-statement/fair-research-software-wg-case-statement) (RDA)
- [FAIR4RS](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS) (GitHub)
- [Steering committee meeting agendas and minutes](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/tree/master/meetings/2020) (GitHub)

## Agenda

1. Welcome to all new attendees
2. Review action items from [previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2021/2021-06-07-Minutes.md#list-of-actions)
3. Community Review report update and next steps
4. Discuss plan for use cases/adoption guidelines
5. Preparation for upcoming events
6. Any other business

## Action items

From [the June meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2021/2021-06-07-Minutes.md#list-of-actions)

1. **ACTION Neil:** to finalize the document to send with the community consultation. **Done**
2. **ACTION Paula:** to prepare metadata about the document to be submitted to the RDA. **Done**
3. **ACTION Paula:** to send the submitted output to the mailing list and launch the community review period. From FAIR4RS and ReSA **Done**
4. **ACTION Carlos:** FAIR Festival present FAIR4RS, Dan FAIR4ML, Carole FAIR workflows **Done**
5. **ACTION Dan** : FAIR Festival to organise moderator and panelists via email for FAIR Festival **Done**
6. **ACTION Morane** : to reserve a DOI for subgroup 3 output
7. **ACTION Paula:** to upload the June minutes to [GH](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/) **Done**

## Notes

**1. Welcome to all new attendees (Paula) 5 min**

Also, a warm welcome to our official four new co-chairs: Jen, Fotis, Carlos and Morane - Well deserved applause!

Welcome to Andreas and Qian who joined the call for the first time.

**2. Review action**
items from the [previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2021/2021-05-10-Minutes.md#list-of-actions) (Paula) 5 min

**ACTION Morane**: follow up with the DOI for subgroup 3 output.

**ACTION Neil:** upload subgroup 4 report to Zenodo (DOI has been reserved).

**3. Community Review report update and next steps**

3.1 Report (Paula) (5 min)

1. [Launched on June 11th, 2021](https://www.rd-alliance.org/group/fair-research-software-fair4rs-wg/outcomes/fair-principles-research-software-fair4rs) via RDA, ReSA via mailing lists and twitter. Then via the FORCE11 mailing list on June 16th.
2. During the first week on June 16th, it was updated from an RDA output to a RDA recommendation, which needs to be supported by early adopters (next point in the agenda). Potential adopters that have been contacted are:
  1. Australia Research Data Commons
  2. ELIXIR
  3. Netherlands eScience Center
  4. ZB MED
3. We requested that RDA add all the Steering Committee members as chairs
4. A reminder via the FAIR4RS WG post was sent on June 21st and on the 24th via the ReSA newsletter
5. Comments received from: Keith Russell, Joachim Wuttke, Limor Peer, Yo Yehudi, Nicola Soranzo, Tek Raj Chhetri, Paul Secular, Joris van Eijnatten, Rob van Nieuwpoort, Wilhelm Hasselbring, Peter Hill, Michael Barton, Roberto di Cosmo.
6. Neil responded to comments from a number of different venues.
  1. Additional comments received by mail. **Action all**: if any other comments were received please send to Neil.

3.2 Next steps (Neil) (25 min)

**ACTION Neil:** will create an Action Plan for the comments:

- Simple things: typos, or additions to text
- Suggested changes to principles: require drafting group discussion
- Some larger scope comments, e.g., services, preservation: need working group discussion

From the comments, people generally want more explanatory text and specific examples

Question: should the examples be included in the FAIR4RS principles, or would these be in separate documents?

Answer: see later question about the line between the adoption guidelines

There are a few comments about how to deal with &quot;community standards&quot; and &quot;community guidance&quot; (maybe this is work for the Roadmap Working Group).

What would be the preferred way of proceeding with the revisions of the document:

- Option #A: set up calls (similarly to last time)
- Option #B: set it up asynchronously

The milestone for finalizing the document is for this month (July 2021). Although there will be no objection by RDA, pushing it for later will also have an effect on the next milestone (Sep 2021).

The next milestone is about the adopters - and having them prepare a timeline on how they would adopt the output. RDA contacts the adopters and asks them directly (within the next two months) about their timeplan.

Aim is to have a revision of the principles as soon as possible and republished on the RDA website. Also look to publish a preprint of the paper which may include the larger revisions.

Question: Are we looking to create the equivalent of having definition plus explanation text (similarly to the GO FAIR website)?.

Question: What&#39;s the line between the adoption guidelines

How much do we need to fit the adoption guidelines to be tailored to the potential adopters?

There are existing pieces of work that are generic FAIR guidelines - and we could create adoption guidelines based on these:

1. The bare principles
2. The principles along with very high level guidance for adoption (similar to what is on the GO FAIR website for the FAIR Data Principles)
3. Generic, but more detailed, adoption guidelines that include specific examples of things to do, e.g. pointing to catalogues like FAIRSharing
4. Giving specific examples for a particular community, as a use case

At this point, the current draft of the FAIR4RS Principles is a combination of 1 and some aspects of 2 and 3 for some principles, along with explanatory text on how to interpret - but not adopt - the principles.

The bare principles is something that we have in any case (there are there as a table)

For most of the people (the general readership), they will need some examples. So, the early adopters could be providing some examples that could be used here.

Next steps: we setup an asynchronous meeting to look at addressing the comments

**ACTION Neil**: create a list of things that we need to address.

We will also need to create a bit of extra text for the paper / preprint. We also need to advertise what comes after this, so that the community is aware and prepared.

Question: Is it possible to send an update within the month?

Answer: Given that we have a few comments that will require some more detailed discussion (and there are several people away), it may not be possible.

  1. Revising the FAIR4RS principles
    1. Increasing the amount of explanatory text (i.e., creating the equivalent to the &quot;GO FAIR website&quot; for FAIR4RS)?
    2. Addressing the material comments
  2. Send a short update via RDA, ReSA, FORCE11
  3. Discuss paper publication - [journal options](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1tWtE-WOV76Cj00f_qsbviUhWly1WoXYosxXFAMk91IU/edit#) and timeline

Star first with the top 3 options (in that order): Nature/Nature Data, Data Science, F1000Research

**4. Discuss plan for use cases/adoption guidelines (Michelle) (10 min)**

1. Coordinate [use cases and adoption guidelines](https://docs.google.com/document/d/19BjNe3pRnsNVKcN_HXS7Fm-AjUI-fDu4bSb7j5dW7gw/edit)

Suggestion to form subgroups to work on this.

Number 3 might be the current suggestion for adoption guidelines

Create a subgroup on helping adoption guideline writers ensure compliance with the FAIR4RS Principles? For example; which group is checking a set of guidelines enables an adopter to be following the FAIR4RS principles. Is this part of the Adoption Guidelines Subgroup?

It seems like a long term goal. I am in favor of having WG for use cases. In this case, we&#39;ll have a ground-up approach (for a community perspective) towards the defined FAIR4RS principles, with this group acting as the &quot;validator&quot;.

An informal &quot;FAIR check&quot; could be part of the adoption process.

Q: How long do we expect the subgroups to work on this.

A: Possible a few months - possibly a bit longer, judging from the previous subgroups. But need to align to our milestones

We also need to define when these subgroups will start (July/August are not optimal months for starting new activities)

We could have different starting points, if we don&#39;t expect any kind of synchronization between the different adoption subgroups.

The communities should be doing most (if not all of the work) - at that stage, we are mostly at a consulting level. And this process will not stop at the end of the WG.

Leyla: You can add ZB MED as early adopter, not sure when we will implement but we will work on a plan to do so.

**Action: Michelle**: Release information and take a webinar in September

**Action: Michelle**: Starting some documents on the 2-3 potential subgroups (incl. leadership).

**Action: Michelle**: talk to the early adopters

Q: Is the &quot;How FAIR is your software&quot; not a use-case (the e-science centre software tool)

A: It could be a use case, but it may not be possible to be completed by whichever date is the milestone.

**5. Past and Future activities short updates (10 min)**

  1. June IWSG2021 (Dan) - [presented](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4923123)
  2. June 22 [FAIR Festival](https://www.go-fair.org/events/fair-festival-2021/) (Carlos, Dan, Carole and Anna-Lena), similar crowd to the USA
  3. June 24 RDA OA (group meeting/private) (Dan)
  4. June 28 Atelier RDA France (Morane)
  5. July 09 [Submission](https://www.rd-alliance.org/plenaries/rda-18th-plenary-meeting-virtual/fair-principles-research-software-fair4rs-and-next-steps) sent for RDA VP18 (Michelle)
  6. July 19 ESIP (Paula) - **Action:** Paula will send updates and slides
  7. July 20-22 [Collegeville](https://collegeville.github.io/CW21/) (Dan) - [whitepaper](https://collegeville.github.io/CW21/WorkshopResources/WhitePapers/fair4rs-team.pdf) accepted
  8. July 27-29 FSCI (Leyla) two sessions 4OSS
  9. Aug 3 &amp; 10 NNB (Paula) - **Action:** Paula will send updates and slides - Comments in English about the translation
  10. Sep 15-17 NZ RSE (Paula) - **Action:** Paula finalize and submit
  11. Sep IEEE eScience (Michelle, Dan, Fotis, Leyla) panel invitation only

For detail see the [Engagements Table](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/CommunityEngagement.md)

**6. AOB**

**ACTION Paula**: upload the July minutes to [GH](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/).

## Next Meeting

**Next Meeting**: Monday, August 09th 20:00 UTC (**chair**: Daniel S. Katz, **note taker**: Paula A. Martinez). For invitation see events on the [FAIR4RS WG events](https://www.rd-alliance.org/node/69317/events)

## List of actions

_(as copied from the minutes above)_

- **ACTION Morane**: follow up with the DOI for subgroup 3 output.
- **ACTION Neil**: upload subgroup 4 report to Zenodo (DOI has been reserved).
- **ACTION Neil**: will create an Action Plan for the comments received.
- **ACTION Neil**: create a list of things that we need to address after the consultation.
- **ACTION Michelle**: Release information and take a webinar in September - use cases and adoption guidelines groups
- **ACTION Michelle**: Starting some documents on the 2-3 potential subgroups (incl. leadership).
- **ACTION Michelle**: talk to the early adopters
- **ACTION Paula**: will send updates and slides from ESIP
- **ACTION Paula**: will send updates and slides - Comments in English about the translation of the principles
- **ACTION Paula**: finalize and submit abstract to present FAIR4RS at the NZ RSEconf 
- **ACTION Paula**: upload the July minutes to [GH](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/).
