# 13/14 September 2021 FAIR4RS Call

[_Your time conversion_](https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?msg=FAIR4RS+September+committee+meeting&iso=20210913T20&p1=1440&ah=1)

- **Chair**: Fotis Psomopoulos
- **Notes**: Daniel S. Katz
- **Attendees**: Paula Martinez, Daniel S. Katz, Francoise Genova, Carlos Martinez, Michelle Barker, Morane, Gruenpeter, Fotis Psomopoulos, Anne Fouilloux, Andreas Czerniak, Chris Erdmann, Leyla Jael Garcia, Neil Chue Hong, Samuel Grayson, Daniel Garijo
- **Apologies**: Jen Harrow

_Chairing rota_: Michelle Barker (October 2021), Carlos Martinez (November 2021), Neil Chue Hong (December 2021), Leyla Jael Garcia Castro (Jan 2022), Jen Harrow (Feb 2022), Morane Gruenpeter (March 2022), Paula Andrea Martinez (April 2022), Daniel S. Katz (May 2021), Fotis Psomopoulos (June 2021)

_**Previous chair takes notes at next meeting**_

## Quick links

- [FAIR4RS WG](https://www.rd-alliance.org/groups/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg) (RDA) & [Case statement](https://www.rd-alliance.org/group/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg/case-statement/fair-research-software-wg-case-statement) (RDA)
- [FAIR4RS](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS) (GitHub)
- [Steering committee meeting agendas and minutes](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/tree/master/meetings/2020) (GitHub)

## Agenda

1. Welcome to all new attendees
2. Review action items from [previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2021/2021-08-09-Minutes.md#list-of-actions)
3. Community Review next steps
4. Discuss plan for use cases/adoption guidelines
5. Preparation for upcoming events
6. Any other business


## Action items

From [the August meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2021/2021-08-09-Minutes.md#list-of-actions)

- **ACTION Morane**: follow up with the DOI for [subgroup 3 output](https://docs.google.com/document/d/139vi8KCz2h0KyYfhN46SR7bEuJ3nggYgb1kaN6CNkSQ/edit?usp=sharing)
  - DOI has been reserved: 10.5281/zenodo.5504016
  - Full deposit for: FAIR4RS, subgroup3. (2021). Research Software Definition workshop. Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5503982
  - The workshop is referenced in the summary report "Defining Research Software: a controversial discussion"
  - There is also a call documented - should it be deposited?
  - The [working document of subgroup3](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1PvYiYJxd7-vrmTusTvS8fYp47Wu6v-c_XMu-LjIBKio/edit?usp=sharing) - should it be deposited?
  - Question: Could the working document be considered an RDA output?
    - Answer: probably not
    - Overall answer: Having the report be an RDA output should be fine (need to consult with the subgroup 3 first as well). The notes will not be an output. In either case, it could be deposited as an RDA output after the WG RDA output.
- **ACTION Neil**: upload subgroup 4 report to Zenodo (DOI has been reserved)
  - **Ongoing**
- **ACTION Neil**: Coordinate a meeting for the writers group to address comments
  - **Done**. Meetings took place at the end of August and more substantial comments discussed and resolutions suggested.
- **ACTION Michelle**: will organize a new document for the coming publication for everyone to add content to
  - **Done**. [Draft document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/16KrE62qjTt-4AXpT-c2OhVDp25eP7-h_mokhelVLM60/edit) - is it problematic that a lot of it is cut and paste from other (preprint) documents?
  - We should come back to this later, as we finish the document; the tone might not be right for a paper
  - Could check with the appropriate editor at Scientific Data
    - **ACTION Neil**: check with Susanna-Assunta Sansone about what format a submission on FAIR4RS to Scientific Data should take (and whether Scientific Data is interested).
- **ACTION Paula**: with Neil record names of contributors to review process
  - **Done**. Paula has supplied names and these have been added to latest draft.
- **ACTION Morane**: to check names of contributors from the French Atelier
  - After checking with Françoise Genova, we will add all the names in the participants list as contributors since comments weren't with a specific name
  - **Done**
  - Need to decide on whether to include all names. They could be listed as people who attended vs people who actively contributed.
  - Given that the workshop was designed to get feedback on the FAIR4RS Principles, it’s appropriate to list all participants in the table in the document.
- **ACTION Paula**: Sent the list of contributors/participants at the RDA Atelier to Neil.
- **ACTION Michelle**: to update the subgroup numbering in the forms and Paula will update the form
  - **Done**
- **ACTION Subgroup 6**: talk to the early adopters
  - Like the actions for the other new subgroups, this will happen
- **ACTION Morane**: will coordinate with Stephanie Hagstrom about topic and date.
  - **Done**
  - **_Webinar will be on September 23rd_**
- **ACTION Paula**: will upload the July minutes to [GH](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/).; add invitation to RDA events and posts.
  - **Done**


## Notes

**1. Welcome to all new attendees (Fotis) 5 min**

Samuel Grayson - student at Illinois of Dan and Darko Marinov - interested in how software is engineered/used in research

**2. Review action items from [previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2021/2021-08-09-Minutes.md#list-of-actions) (Fotis) 5 min**

- **ACTION Neil**: upload subgroup 4 report to Zenodo (DOI has been reserved)
- **ACTION Neil**: check with Susanna-Assunta Sansone about what format a submission on FAIR4RS to Scientific Data should take (and whether Scientific Data is interested)
- **ACTION Paula**: Sent the list of contributors/participants at the RDA Atelier to Neil.



**3. Community Review next steps (Neil ) 15 minutes**

See [responses to comments from review period](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1pbZ0dNA0CxgOKalpDKVyYeH5xxeLbgCjAROcUmoCZ_M/edit#)

- Had two meetings of the editing group to discuss comments and propose how to address them.
- Two additional considerations identified:
  - Removal of the terms must/should in the guiding principles themselves (keeping the terms in the explanatory text where illustrative)
    - These terms were added in new principles, but didn't exist in the original "data" principles
  - Aiming to be more consistent in the tense / grammar used in principles (but not at the expense of clarity).
    - This may have implications for translations of the principles.
    - Translators might need to ask questions to editing group to ensure translations are aligned with English version
  - **ACTION all**: For anyone who’d like to assist, please review the document and make suggestions (change-tracked) for any items that you feel comfortable to address.
- Neil now creating change-tracked draft that implements the proposed resolutions to the issues.
  - To be checked by editing group (by the next monthly group meeting)
  - Then to be published
- Due by end of the WG lifecycle (i.e Feb 2022). But the adopters will need this sooner.


**4. Discuss plan for [use cases/adoption guidelines](https://docs.google.com/document/d/19BjNe3pRnsNVKcN_HXS7Fm-AjUI-fDu4bSb7j5dW7gw/edit) (Subgroup leads 5 minutes each) (15 min)**

- [Subgroup 5: Adoption guidelines](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1_cIgpx2XqElS0UGSxAmNwLiWav9hq08a7264wIMODwU/edit#)
  - ~10 group members
  - Initial email sent
  - planning/scheduling monthly meetings
- [Subgroup 6: Adoption support group](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1t6DGsJYM2FJV1JMLiaEX0841c4utN0cNYh3WsmvqYO4/edit#)
  - ~6 group members
  - Initial email sent
  - Collecting contacts about potential early adopters
  - If anyone want to suggest early adopters, please let Dan and Carlos know
- [Subgroup 7: Governance](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1pBBs8hSF8m3WsFRFjJuFHd1sC-jfPV3_0xUTMVzEuMc/edit#)
  - 6 group members
  - Group leads not on this call
  - **ACTION Michelle**: to check with them about how they are doing
    - **Done**: Qian is out of office until Sep 23rd.


**5. Past and Future activities short updates (10 min)**

For detail see the [Engagements Table](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/CommunityEngagement.md)

  1. **Aug 30**: RDA Nordic countries (Carlos, Paula, Leyla) Two more coordination meetings.
    - 165 registrations, 95 attendees
    - 2 hour session
    - Recorded, notes shared (see engagements table)
    - Experiences shared
    - Invited people to join subgroups
    - Post-workshop survey given
      - CodeRefinery could be one of early adopters
      - NeuroscienceInstitute (SE)
      - Overall could be a good pool for potential adopters
  2. **Sep 1**: Subgroups intro Webinar (Dan)
    - 18 registrations, 6 attendees (including 4 presenters)
    - Short session (~25 min)
    - Recorded and made public
    - Invited people to join subgroups
    - Both non-presenter attendees did join subgroups (100% conversion!)
  3. **Sep 17**: NZ RSE (Paula)
    - To present updates and to invite people to subgroups
    - 15-minute slot
  4. **Sep 20**: [FAIReScience](https://researchsoft.github.io/FAIReScience/) (Leyla)
    - 4-hour workshop (see https://www.escience2021.org/timetable)
    - Lots of presentations, including FAIR4RS
    - discussion/breakouts
    - Planning a white paper
  5. **Sep 23**: RDA public invitation FAIR4RS updates (Morane)
    - 1 hour session hosted by RDA USA and they are helping with advertising
    - 68 participants already
    - Prep call on 17 Sept at 16.00 CEST with Stephanie
    - Presenter 1 Morane - Introduction (Software in Research and in RDA)
    - Presenter 2 Carlos - Present the FAIR4RS WG activities
    - Presenter 3 Neil -Review FAIR principles for research software
    - Presenter 4 Dan - Challenges + Future steps?
    - Carlos asked: do we have somewhere a slide that summarises our community engagement activities?
    - **ACTION Morane**: to review slides with the reviewed principles, if text changed.
    - **ACTION Morane**: to decide if we should do poll or Google doc activity (with other presenters)
      - Some suggested questions at the beginning to get the audience context. Not an audience particularly familiar with Research Software, so there is an opportunity to capture more general questions.
        - If there are principles that are harder to adopt
        - Who is likely to be adopting the principles?
        - Adoption questions
        - Challenges? - ambitious because of the time
        - What assistance with FAIR4RS they might need

**6. AOB**
  - RDA Plenary 18 (VP18) session proposal accepted. The options were mostly in the 1st week. We need to be aware that there is an overlap with the ELIXIR BioHackathon on the 2nd week.
  - **ACTION Fotis**: will upload the July minutes to [GH](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings)
  - **ACTION Paula**: add invitation to RDA events and posts.

## Next Meeting

**Next Meeting**: Monday, October 11th 20:00 UTC (_**chair**_: Michelle Barker, _**note taker**_: Fotis Psomopoulos). For invitation see events on the [FAIR4RS WG events](https://www.rd-alliance.org/node/69317/events)

## List of actions

_(as copied from the minutes above)_

1. **ACTION Neil**: upload subgroup 4 report to Zenodo (DOI has been reserved)
2. **ACTION Neil**: check with Susanna-Assunta Sansone about what format a submission on FAIR4RS to Scientific Data should take (and whether Scientific Data is interested)
3. **ACTION Paula**: Sent the list of contributors/participants at the RDA Atelier to Neil.
4. **ACTION all**: For anyone who'd like to assist in drafting the responses to comments from the RDA Community Review, please review the document and make suggestions (change-tracked) for any items that you feel comfortable to address.
5. **ACTION Michelle**: to check with Subgroup 7 Leads about how they are doing
  - **Done**
6. **ACTION Morane**: For the Sep 23rd event to review slides with the reviewed principles, if text changed.
7. **ACTION Morane**: For the Sep 23rd event to decide if we should do poll or Google doc activity (with other presenters)
8. **ACTION Fotis**: will upload the July minutes to [GH](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings)
  - **Done**
9. **ACTION Paula**: add invitation to RDA events and posts.
