# 9/10 August 2021 FAIR4RS Call

[_Your time conversion_](https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?msg=FAIR4RS+August+committee+meeting&amp;iso=20210809T20&amp;p1=1440&amp;ah=1)

- **Chair**: Daniel S. Katz
- **Notes**: Paula A. Martinez
- **Attendees**: Michelle Barker, Alexander Struck, Carlos Martinez, Andreas Czerniak, Neil Chue Hong, Leyla Castro, Qian Zhang, Morane Gruenpeter, Mike Heroux
- **Apologies**: Jen Harrow

_Chairing rota_: Daniel S. Katz (August 2021), Fotis Psomopoulos (September 2021), Michelle Barker (October 2021), Carlos Martinez (November 2021), Neil Chue Hong (December 2021), Leyla Jael Garcia Castro (Jan 2022), Jen Harrow (Feb 2022), Morane Gruenpeter (March 2022), Paula Andrea Martinez (April 2022)

_**Previous chair takes notes at next meeting**_

## Quick links

- [FAIR4RS WG](https://www.rd-alliance.org/groups/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg) (RDA) & [Case statement](https://www.rd-alliance.org/group/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg/case-statement/fair-research-software-wg-case-statement) (RDA)
- [FAIR4RS](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS) (GitHub)
- [Steering committee meeting agendas and minutes](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/tree/master/meetings/2020) (GitHub)

## Agenda

1. Welcome to all new attendees
2. Review action items from [previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2021/2021-07-12-Minutes.md#list-of-actions)
3. Community Review next steps
4. Discuss plan for use cases/adoption guidelines
5. Preparation for upcoming events
6. Any other business

## Action items

From [the July meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2021/2021-07-12-Minutes.md#list-of-actions)

- **ACTION Morane**: follow up with the DOI for subgroup 3 output.
  - **Ongoing**
- **ACTION Neil**: upload subgroup 4 report to Zenodo (DOI has been reserved)
  - **Ongoing**
- **ACTION Neil**: will create an Action Plan for the comments received. Create a list of things that we need to address after the consultation.
  - **Done.** The document is [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1pbZ0dNA0CxgOKalpDKVyYeH5xxeLbgCjAROcUmoCZ_M/edit#). Neil has suggested proposed actions for comments. Ones requiring discussion are highlighted in yellow. Some comments include suggestions for future guidance.
- **ACTION Michelle**: Release information and take a webinar in September - use cases and adoption guidelines groups. **Partially done** - subgroup leads identified and aims written
- **ACTION Michelle**: Starting some [documents](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1UQ_81cQTXklXdm9gn9979zL1xl5wKJ-RGRtX_5wWWHA/edit) on the 3 subgroups (incl. leadership). **Done**
- **ACTION Michelle**: talk to the early adopters - Not done. I suggest the relevant subgroup pick this up in September. **New ACTION Subgroup 6** talk to the early adopters
- **ACTION Paula**: will send updates and slides from ESIP. **Done**
- **ACTION Paula**: will send updates and slides - Comments in English about the translation of the principles. **Done**
- **ACTION Paula**: finalize and submit abstract to present FAIR4RS at the NZ RSE conf **Done**
- **ACTION Paula**: upload the July minutes to[GH](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/). **Done**

## Notes

**1. Welcome to all new attendees (Dan) 5 min**

Alex consulting for researchers and how to deal with research software. Andreas is interested in the community and computing processes and now working in the library and interested in FAIR. Mike is first time here interested in the community and computing projects in general.

**2. Review action items from [previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2021/2021-05-10-Minutes.md#list-of-actions) (Dan) 5 min**

**ACTION** Morane: follow up with the DOI for subgroup 3 output.

Ongoing. - TDB before next meeting

**ACTION** Neil: upload subgroup 4 report to Zenodo (DOI has been reserved).

Ongoing. TDB before next meeting

Other Actions to be discussed during the meeting.

Paula&#39;s actions completed.

**3. Community Review next steps (Neil ) 15 minutes**

See [responses to comments from review period](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1pbZ0dNA0CxgOKalpDKVyYeH5xxeLbgCjAROcUmoCZ_M/edit#)

Comments collected and described in the table above. Those that need discussion from the drafting group will be sent and we will work asynchronously on them. Some of them will need more discussion.

Do we need to organise a meeting?

Yes, we might need this time. To discuss reproducibility of software and how quality affects reusability and the way that software is structured. A smaller writers group will be invited for a meeting. We will also send a note to the whole group with updates.

**ACTION** Neil: Coordinate a meeting for the writers group to address comments

Q: Is there a kind of assessment for the FAIR principles?

A: We expect the principles to be measurable but we do not want to propose a process at this point. We expect a new group will start around FAIR metrics. The new subgroup3 will start thinking about the processes around governance.

**ACTION Michelle**: will organise a new document for the coming publication for everyone to add content to

Dan: This is in addition to the revised version of the principles document, which we will update on the RDA site.

**ACTION Paula:** with Neil record names of contributors to review process

**ACTION Morane**: to check names of contributors from the French Atelier

**4. Discuss plan for [use cases/adoption guidelines](https://docs.google.com/document/d/19BjNe3pRnsNVKcN_HXS7Fm-AjUI-fDu4bSb7j5dW7gw/edit) (Michelle) (15 min)**

New subgroups for the next milestones. Narrow scope, so they can be completed between September and December.

Subgroup 3 has one lead, if anyone else would like to co-lead with Tom Honeyman. Qian Zhang volunteered.

When do we want to send out information to the WG about joining these subgroups?

- [Subgroup 5: Adoption guidelines](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1_cIgpx2XqElS0UGSxAmNwLiWav9hq08a7264wIMODwU/edit#)
- [Subgroup 6: Adoption support group](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1t6DGsJYM2FJV1JMLiaEX0841c4utN0cNYh3WsmvqYO4/edit#)
- [Subgroup 7: Governance](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1pBBs8hSF8m3WsFRFjJuFHd1sC-jfPV3_0xUTMVzEuMc/edit#)

Any final comments on [the reg form](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSf8yKuUWLNK4tOwjTAr6lJSy2FD79AvhOAoN8GNvyIkuuj4FQ/viewform)?

Leyla: Can we start some mailing lists for groups?

Carlos: my preference will be to send the information at the same time as the webinars.

Do we want to go ahead with public webinars to share subgroup activities in public webinars early Sept? If so, who can coordinate this? [Doodle poll](https://doodle.com/poll/3h64uqgmyb89qcxt?utm_source=poll&amp;utm_medium=link) to find times.

Call for volunteers to set webinar times, leads, invitations, and slides.

**ACTION Michelle**: write a post to the WG about the launch of the subgroups (including the webinars)

**ACTION Leyla**: For the subgroups webinar: put together a subfolder and start the slide deck and distribute this info with subgroup leads

**ACTION Dan**: Will coordinate the call - will draft an email announcement, that includes the registration form, will schedule a call ([US CDT 1 Sept 4 pm](https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?iso=20210901T16&amp;p1=64&amp;ah=1)), will set up zoom and will run the call.

This call will be recorded and send to the group, unless someone else wants to run a second call, perhaps Tom (who was not on this call and didn&#39;t have the chance to volunteer)

**Launch September 1 /2 ([your timezone](https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?iso=20210901T16&amp;p1=64&amp;ah=1))**

Neil: I think we should number the new subgroups 5, 6 and 7 to not get confused

Subgroups name&#39;s updated from 1-2 to 5-7.

**ACTION Michelle**: to update the subgroup numbering in the forms and Paula will update the form

_RDA webinar info: The webinars are part of 2021 webinar series funded by the NSF highlighting the RDA group outputs. We have presented 6 [webinars in this series](https://www.rd-alliance.org/plenaries-events/webinars/past-webinars) to date. The goal of these webinars is to showcase the outcomes thus far from an RDA group and/or to feature projects that are utilizing the RDA group outputs in their projects._

(A different) RDA public webinar for the WG outputs - who could lead this and when? September by invitation. Maybe October.

**ACTION Morane**: will coordinate with Stephanie Hagstrom about topic and date.

**5. Past and Future activities short updates (10 min)**

For detail see the [Engagements Table](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/CommunityEngagement.md)

  1. July 27-29 FSCI (Leyla, Fotis) two sessions 4OSS → done, few attendees
  2. Aug 3 &amp; 10 Encuentro de Bioinformática en México - NNB (Paula) Two sessions in Spanish. Paula presented, Carlos and Leyla reviewed the presentation. A total of 70 participants, slides and videos are shared via the Engagements table.
  3. Aug 30 RDA Nordic countries (Carlos, Paula, Leyla) Two more coordination meetings.
  4. Sep 20 [FAIReScience](https://researchsoft.github.io/FAIReScience/) Leyla to coordinate logistics, all to [register](https://www.escience2021.org/registration) and advertise
  5. ADD any other events + subgroups webinars, and RDA webinar

**6. AOB**

**ACTION Paula**: will upload the July minutes to [GH](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/); add invitation to RDA events and posts.

## Next Meeting

**Next Meeting**: Monday, Septembre 13th 20:00 UTC (_ **chair** _: Fotis Psomopoulos, _ **note taker** _: Carlos Martinez). For invitation see events on the[FAIR4RS WG events](https://www.rd-alliance.org/node/69317/events)

## List of actions

_(as copied from the minutes above)_

- **ACTION Morane**: follow up with the DOI for subgroup 3 output
- **ACTION Neil**: upload subgroup 4 report to Zenodo (DOI has been reserved)
- **ACTION Neil**: Coordinate a meeting for the writers group to address comments
- **ACTION Michelle**: will organise a new document for the coming publication for everyone to add content to
- **ACTION Paula**: with Neil record names of contributors to review process
- **ACTION Morane**: to check names of contributors from the French Atelier
- **ACTION Michelle**: to update the subgroup numbering in the forms and Paula will update the form
- **ACTION Subgroup 6**: talk to the early adopters 
- **ACTION Morane**: will coordinate with Stephanie Hagstrom about topic and date.
- **ACTION Paula**: will upload the July minutes to[GH](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/); add invitation to RDA events and posts.
