# 11/12 October 2021 FAIR4RS Call

[_Your time conversion_](https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?msg=FAIR4RS+october+committee+meeting&amp;iso=20211011T20&amp;p1=1440&amp;ah=1)

- **Chair** : Michelle Barker
- **Notes** : Fotis Psomopoulos
- **Attendees** : Daniel S. Katz, Paula Andrea Martinez, Carlos Martinez, Julia Collins, Peter Neish, Leyla Jael Castro, Lorraine Hwang, Tom Honeyman, Tovo Rabemanantsoa, Chris Erdmann, Morane Gruenpeter
- **Apologies** : Jen Harrow, Neil Chue Hong

_Chairing rota_: Carlos Martinez (November 2021), Neil Chue Hong (December 2021), Leyla Jael Castro (Jan 2022), Jen Harrow (Feb 2022), Morane Gruenpeter (March 2022), Paula Andrea Martinez (April 2022), Daniel S. Katz (May 2022), Fotis (June 2022), Michelle (July 2022)

_ **Previous chair takes notes at next meeting** _

## Quick links

- [FAIR4RS WG](https://www.rd-alliance.org/groups/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg) (RDA) &amp;[Case statement](https://www.rd-alliance.org/group/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg/case-statement/fair-research-software-wg-case-statement) (RDA)
- [FAIR4RS](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS) (GitHub)
- [Steering committee meeting agendas and minutes](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/tree/master/meetings/2020) (GitHub)

## Agenda

1. Welcome to all new attendees
2. Review action items from [previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2021/2021-09-13-Minutes.md)
3. Community review next steps
4. Process for drafting of submission to Scientific Data
5. Subgroups updates
6. Past and future activities
7. Any other business

## Action items

From [the September meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2021/2021-09-13-Minutes.md)

- **ACTION Neil** : upload subgroup 4 report to Zenodo (DOI has been reserved) - in progress
- **ACTION Morane** : upload subgroup 3 report to Zenodo (DOI has been reserved) - in progress. To be reviewed next meeting
- **ACTION Neil** : check with Susanna-Assunta Sansone about what format a submission on FAIR4RS to Scientific Data should take (and whether Scientific Data is interested) - Done
- **ACTION Paula** : Sent the list of contributors/participants at the RDA Atelier to Neil. - Done
- **ACTION all** : For anyone who&#39;d like to assist in drafting the responses to comments from the RDA Community Review, please review the document and make suggestions (change-tracked) for any items that you feel comfortable to address.
  - See also item 3 on agenda.
- **ACTION Michelle** : to check with Subgroup 7 Leads about how they are doing - Done
- **ACTION Morane** : For the Sep 23rd event to review slides with the reviewed principles, if text changed. Decide if we should do poll or Google doc activity (with other presenters) - Done
- **ACTION Fotis** : will upload the July minutes to [GH](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings) - Done
- **ACTION Paula** : add invitation to RDA events and posts. - Done

## Notes

1. Welcome to all new attendees (Michelle) 5 min

    a. Peter Neish: co-chair of the RDA Professionalizing Data Stewardship IG; starting an effort on FAIR4 Research Outputs

    b. Tovo Rabemanantsoa: Part of the Open Science dept of their institute (INRA Centre de Bordeaux Aquitaine); software Developer; joined as interested in FAIR 4 software.

    c. Julia Collins: one of the co-chairs of the RDA Software Source Code IG

1. Review action items from[previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2021/2021-05-10-Minutes.md#list-of-actions) (Michelle) 5 min
    
    a. Carry on Action for Neil and Morane

1. Community Review next steps (Neil - on leave, see notes below) 10 minutes

    a. The comments have now all been addressed in a new draft and this has been circulated to the drafting group for approval. Deadline for Oct 25th.
    b. Once this has been reviewed by the drafting group, it will be submitted to the RDA to replace the current version, and the text used as the basis for the submission to Scientific Data.

1. Process for drafting of submission to Scientific Data (Michelle) 10 mins

    a. Draft article started, but needs alteration to fit outline resulting from discussion by Neil Chue Hong with Susanna-Assunta Sansone (Academic Editor) and Veronique van den Berghe (Senior Associate Editor):
    
    b. If anyone has time in the next couple of weeks, please feel free to add directly on the draft - esp. in sections that are currently missing.
        
        i. **ACTION Dan** : will go through the Draft document, move sections around to meet the outline below, and identify
        gaps / areas that need work.
        
        ii. Also add ELIXIR / ARDC / NLeSC / ZB MED adoption strategies
        
            1. ELIXIR is still work in progress (Fotis will be helping on the adoption stories in the draft for ELIXIR)
            
            2. ARDC is in its final version. WPs are in place, need signatures from admin (Tom will be helping on the 
            adoption stories in the draft for ARDC)
            
            3. In this context, Carlos could also help adding an adoption story for eScience Center
            
            4. ZB MED (Leyla will help by adding something about their status and plans)
    
    c. Structure:
    
        i. Background setting the context of the FAIR4RS principles with respect to the FAIR principles, and also how 
        research software practice has changed in the period since the FAIR principles were published succinctly 
        demonstrating the maturation of the community, and demonstrating the intrinsic link between software and data
     
        ii. Setting out the principles themselves, and giving examples of what that might mean for different types of
        software, e.g. what is FAIR enough for a small script used to process data, and for a complex research software
        product?
    
        iii. Demonstration of community support: examples of how FAIR4RS principles have been put into practice (or 
        things that align with the principles, if they pre-date them). Any experiences which should be shared to 
        help others adopt the principles.
        
    d. Audience:
     
        i. Researchers familiar with using software, but who might not consider themselves as software developers
        (and certainly not software engineers). Get across why understanding software (i.e. not treating it like
        a black box) means that you&#39;re able to work with data better and thus improve your research.
        
        ii. Provide examples of practice that Scientific Data readers can take away and implement.
        
    e. Authorship:
    
        i. No limits on the number of authors, though we should restrict to those who have provided substantial
        contributions.

1. Subgroup updates (Subgroup leads 5 minutes each) (15 min) - roughly 25 members across all 3 subgroups
  
    a. Subgroup 5 (Adoption resources)
       
       i. Collecting resources via a spreadsheet (~25 until this point). Met twice in the past month about getting feedback on the process
    
       ii. It was suggested to connect to the RSE Communities
       
       iii. Discussion on scoping the work (list of resources, people are still contributing) and how to organize the next steps
    
       iv. Regular meets the fourth week of each month, in two different time zones + mailing list asynchronous work.
  
    b. Subgroup 6 (Adoption support &amp; experiences)
    
       i. Starting a list of organizations that could be reached-out to as early adopters.

       ii. Communication will start in the next couple of weeks.

       iii. Next step; how are we going to integrate this process in a report / lessons learnt. Still under discussion.
       
           1. List of organizations could be added as supplementary material to the article.
    
       iv. Outputs of subgroup #5 will be used to support early adopters identified in subgroup #6
    
       v. No regular calls - using a mailing list and shared documents
    
       vi Maybe have groups that make progress on adoption present what they&#39;ve done in a way that helps other groups that want to adopt (this could be done just without subgroup 6 but also might be useful for the full FAIR4RS team)
  
    c. Subgroup 7
    
       i. Follow-up on the output document
    
       ii. Within the group; introductions and how the output could be used.
    
       iii. Plan is to work asynchronously

1. Past and future activities - short updates (10 min)

For detail see the [Engagements Table](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/CommunityEngagement.md)

    a. RDA Plenary [submission](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1M0O_9nIyT4xkB-aY2Uan7O9iQOeEOauJFwp2icRNDho/edit) draft, sent [submission](https://www.rd-alliance.org/plenaries/rda-18th-plenary-meeting-virtual/fair-principles-research-software-fair4rs-and-next-steps), [slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1m_1w5eVUzhi2o2_u_A-475qRB6diE7DP4cuVyNLyJJs/present). Our [dates](https://www.rd-alliance.org/rdas-18th-plenary-meeting-programme):
        
        i. Wednesday, 3 November 2021, [14:00 - 15:30](https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?msg=RDA+Plenary+Breakout+session+2&amp;iso=20211103T14&amp;p1=1440&amp;ah=1&amp;am=30) UTC | Breakout 2. Leads: Leyla, Carlos
        
        ii. Thursday, 4 November 2021, [22:30 - 00:00](https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?msg=RDA+Plenary+Breakout+session+6&amp;iso=20211104T2230&amp;p1=1440&amp;ah=1&amp;am=30) UTC | Breakout 6 (repeat session). Leads: Paula, Michelle
        
        iii. What do we expect to get out of the RDA Plenary
         
            1. Updates
          
            2. Is your organization interested in adopting / acting as a use-case for the FAIR4RS output
            (use-case is the act of the adopter when applying the output in a particular scenario. Adoption
            is the goal, implemented through various use-cases/actions by the adopting organization)
            
        iv. Have the same slides/notes for both sessions
            
            1. There is already two sections in the notes for participants/notes
            
            2. A decision on who is going to be speaking in each section
          
            3. Update on the output of the FAIR principles
          
            4. Update on the 3 subgroups (3&#39; each?)
            
            5. Update/report from early adopters (invited?) 2-3&#39; each
          
            6. Proposition by Morane offline: add the FAIRsFAIR new framework for services: 
            [https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5336234](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5336234)
            
            7. **ACTION Carlos, Leyla, Paula and Michelle:** to coordinate the agenda and presentation
            for the FAIR4RS session at the VP18
        
        v. Collaborative notes: [https://tinyurl.com/FAIR4RS-notes-VP18](https://tinyurl.com/FAIR4RS-notes-VP18)
        
        vi. slides: [https://tinyurl.com/FAIR4RS-VP18](https://tinyurl.com/FAIR4RS-VP18)
    
    b. Involvement in RDA WG/IG chairs pre-plenary meeting
        i. October 27, UTC 05:00 and UTC 18:00. 
        [Possible topics](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ALW4p0JTdVw1Y3BoYJaa7kIe1Gbw_qeVpnLyQIEsMJc/edit). 
        Any IG/WG chairs can attend
    
    c. Sep 20 [FAIReScience](https://researchsoft.github.io/FAIReScience/) 
    (Leyla)(see [https://www.escience2021.org/timetable](https://www.escience2021.org/timetable))
    
    d. Sep 23 RDA public invitation FAIR4RS updates (Morane): 
    [FAIR Principles for Research Software FAIR4RS WG](https://youtu.be/s3V1J6J8S9Y)[https://youtu.be/s3V1J6J8S9Y](https://youtu.be/s3V1J6J8S9Y)
        i. Organised by RDA-USA, good questions, ~68 attendees. We can use some of the slides for the RDA plenary
    
    e. Oct 06 WoSSS short updates (Morane/Carlos)
        i. The report will be published later this year
    
    f. Oct 15 Presentation at RDA France 
    [https://rdafrance2021.sciencesconf.org/resource/page/id/1](https://rdafrance2021.sciencesconf.org/resource/page/id/1)

7. AOB

**ACTION Paula** : will upload the October minutes to GH

**ACTION Paula** : add invitation to RDA events and posts.

## Next Meeting

**Next Meeting** : Monday, November 8th 20:00 UTC (_ **chair** _: Carlos Martinez, _ **note taker** _: Michelle Barker). For invitation see events on the[FAIR4RS WG events](https://www.rd-alliance.org/node/69317/events)

## List of actions

_(as copied from the minutes above)_

1. _ **ACTION Neil** __: upload subgroup 4 report to Zenodo (DOI has been reserved) - in progress. To be reviewed next meeting_
2. _ **ACTION Morane** __: upload subgroup 3 report to Zenodo (DOI has been reserved) - in progress. To be reviewed next meeting_
3. **ACTION Dan** : will go through the Draft document, move sections around to meet the outline below, and identify gaps / areas that need work.
4. **ACTION Carlos, Leyla, Paula and Michelle:** to coordinate the agenda and presentation for the FAIR4RS session at the VP18
5. **ACTION Paula** : will upload the October minutes to GH
6. **ACTION Paula** : add invitation to RDA events and posts.
