# 14/15 February 2022 FAIR4RS Call

_[Your time conversion](https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?msg=FAIR4RS+Februarycommittee+meeting&iso=20220214T20&p1=1440&ah=1)_



* **Chair**: Jen Harrow
* **Notes**: Fotis Psomopoulos
* **Attendees**: Francoise Genova, Fotis Psomopoulos, Carlos Martinez, Michelle Barker, Tom Honeyman, Alexander Struck, Morane Gruenpeter, Daniel S. Katz, Line Pouchard, Neil Chue Hong, Daniel Garijo, Paula Andrea Martinez, Qian Zhang, Andreas Czerniak
* **Apologies**: Leyla, 

_Chairing rota_: Paula Andrea Martinez (March 2022), Morane Gruenpeter(April 2022), Daniel S. Katz (May 2022), Fotis Psomopoulos (June 2022), Michelle (July 2022), Carlos Martinez (August 2022), Neil Chue Hong (September 2022)

**_Previous chair takes notes at next meeting_**


## Quick links



* [FAIR4RS WG](https://www.rd-alliance.org/groups/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg) (RDA) &[ Case statement](https://www.rd-alliance.org/group/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg/case-statement/fair-research-software-wg-case-statement) (RDA)
* [FAIR4RS](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS) (GitHub)
* [Steering committee meeting agendas and minutes](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/tree/master/meetings/2020) (GitHub)


## Agenda



1. Welcome to all new attendees
2. Review action items from previous meeting (Jan 2022)
3. Progress on finalization of RDA recommendation (Neil) 
    1. The principles have been split into a [separate document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1bo7wosprdzdVYhJBqJUkJmXbM4frB9cpkK_aLOZWsYs/edit#).
    2. 
4. Progress on [submission](https://docs.google.com/document/d/16KrE62qjTt-4AXpT-c2OhVDp25eP7-h_mokhelVLM60/edit) to Scientific Data
5. Update subgroups  
    1. Subgroup 5 - Adoption guidelines  
    2. Subgroup 6 - Adoption support  
    3. Subgroup 7 - Governance  
6. Past and future activities
7. Interest in RDA BoF session proposed by Lauren Cadwallader (see below)?
8. AOB


## Action items

From the [January meeting](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Bb6wwSCQ3YqaKcc7yUmkZijwUlNl4fzPzukwRLN8PIw/edit#heading=h.j7k7ef3xu2pn)



1. **ACTION: Neil** upload subgroup 4 report to Zenodo (DOI has been reserved) 
2. **ACTION: Neil** send an email to group asking for contributions to RDA Recommendation and Scientific Data paper (as noted above) - DONE
3. **ACTION: Leyla** will call for a meeting with subgroup 5 co-chairs - DONE
4. **ACTION: Dan** will need to understand whether anything has been communicated back. [This was about how subgroup 6 was progressing]
    1. Carlos/Dan need to clean up doc, will try to do by next meeting 
5. **ACTION: Fotis** will upload the January minutes to GitHub - DONE


## Notes

Items for this meeting



1. Welcome to all new attendees
    1. Line Pouchard (Brookhaven National Laboratory, DOE, US). Interested mostly in FAIR data for AI; research software is part of this.  
2. Review action items from previous meeting  
    1. **Action: Neil to upload subgroup 4 report to Zenodo (DOI has been reserved)** - in progress  
        1. Subgroup 4 report needs to be edited to make a clean version and the reason for the delay  
        2. Daniel could take a look  
        3. If people from subgroup 4 can have a look through the report for any final checks, that might help push things forward  
        4. **Action: Neil** will email to be sent to subgroup 4 members, in case there are people open to help.  
    2. **Action: Dan** will need to understand whether anything has been communicated back. [This was about how subgroup 6 was progressing]  
        1. **Action: Carlos/Dan need to clean up subgroup 6 doc, will try to do by next meeting**  
3. Notes for this meeting items  
    1. Progress on finalization of RDA recommendation  
        1. Neil is finalising the document - thank you to people for final comments  
        2. Still going backwards and forwards on “software are” vs “software is” in the document!  
            1. Can this depend on the context?  
            2. There is no strong opinion either way, apart from making sure that there is consistency.  
            3. “Software artifacts are, but software is”  
        3. As a side note, RDA expects to have the WG output finalized.  
        4. Given that the document is now split, and there are significant differences, we need to post this up for community consultation. The duration is ~1 month. We don’t really need to prepare additional documents.  
            4. Neil will be going through any substantive comments that may come up during the consultation process.  
    2. Progress on [submission](https://docs.google.com/document/d/16KrE62qjTt-4AXpT-c2OhVDp25eP7-h_mokhelVLM60/edit) to Scientific Data  
        1. We have a full draft now  
        2. As soon as the final principles are in place, the manuscript should be ready.  
        3. How are we going to refer to the version of the principles that will be released in RDA (the version that Neil is now finalizing) using the DOI that we have reserved.  
            1. Version 1.0  
            2. If there are minor edits (rest of the documents) and not in the principles themselves, it’s the equivalent of a typo (no new version)  
                1. Minor edits -> keep the same DOI / no new version  
                2. Changing in Principle text -> new DOI / new version  
            3. Version 1.0 (draft ) or v1.0-rc (release candidate) could be used  
                1. Or have 1st release of the principles  
                2. Add version 1.0 to the RDA document when shared  
            4. **Decision**: Put v1.0 in the document, with a statement that we won’t change the version of the document unless substantial changes/comments are received.  
            5. For the RDA recommendation: List of authors and abstract and contact the secretariat for starting the consultation process  
                1. Neil has a new abstract  
                2. There might not be a need to update the author list  
                3. Plan is to have this by next meeting is in 4 weeks (March 14th), but it might be going a few days after.  
                    1. There is not an urgent pressure from RDA to submit the output within the 18 months, but it would be good to aim close to that.  
    3. Update subgroups  
        1. Subgroup 5 - [Adoption guidelines](https://docs.google.com/document/d/14qDa6PSB1nQLM2Q6fAPXMVtwcyu6gUisrN9l8r5x6q4)  
            1. Past few weeks working on the report  
            2. **Action all WG members: should review the document by the end of the month (28/02)**  
            3. Options on how to make it available:  
                1. Zenodo  
                2. F1000Research  
                3. Ideally the venue should be consistent across all groups (e.g. part of the same zenodo collection)  
            1. Plan is to submit after the next meeting  
            2. Can this be recorded as an RDA output?  
                1. We can ask if the members want to see this as an RDA output  
                2. Does not require consultation review (it’s a different level/status of the RDA output)  
                3. Morane highlighted should look at outputs from other subgroups 1-7 and should be a working group output from community review  
                    1. This will not require any changes to the current report.  
                    2. Will have a change in the RDA output page.  
                    3. **Action: Morane to list all outputs and revisit this decision in April**  
                4. **Action: Paula ask the subgroup 5 members on how they want to proceed (output vs zenodo deposition)**  
        2. Subgroup 6 - Adoption support (Carlos)  
            1. In the process of compiling an output from subgroup 6  
            2. **Action: Carlos will reserve a DOI for the output of subgroup 6**  
            3. Probably to be done before our next SC meeting  
        3. Subgroup 7 - Governance (Tom/Qian)  
            1. Goal is to put together a consultory text  
            2. Plan is for this text to be included with the recommendation  
                1. Is a SC review of the text necessary - a week or so to review is sufficient.  
                2. Is the fact that the text has been created an adequate indicator that the subgroup has fulfilled their role.  
                    1. Yes  
                3. It could be part of the zenodo landing page. The text on governance should be very clear and explicit.  
            3. There is a strong interest from the SSC IG to pick up the maintenance of this recommendation.  
                1. **Action Tom to approach the Software Source Code IG to get more information on what this implies**  
4. Past and future activities  
    1. RDA Call for Proposals by February 26th: [RDA's 19th Plenary - Call for sessions | RDA (rd-alliance.org)](https://www.rd-alliance.org/rdas-19th-plenary-call-sessions)  
        1. We will have ended the work of the WG by the next plenary, so people who are planning to stay engaged  
        2. The WG agenda would be primarily an informative meeting, showcasing the effort and work done during the WG, the outcome, the governance, and ideally some adoption cases.  
        3. Morane can lead the session submission. Tom, Dan, Neil, Paula, Fotis, can also help lead the session / present (if accepted). The subgroup leads could also help with the session submission.  
        4. **Action: Morane to submit proposal**  
    2. We received an invitation from [https://rd-alliance.org/groups/research-data-management-engineering-ig](https://rd-alliance.org/groups/research-data-management-engineering-ig) to coordinate.  
        1. 
    3. Is there interest to present for the Digital Objects Fabric IG?  
        1. It is taking place afternoon EU time, so people from EU and US would be the more convenient to present (if interested)  
        2. Unfortunately: no one can take this role  
    4. Is there interest in the RDA BoF session proposed by Lauren Cadwallader (see below)?  
        1. Tom, Dan, Morane, Alexander are interested and have written back to Lauren on behalf of the group  
5. AOB  
    1. Implementers network of GO-FAIR  
        1. Is this worth pursuing?  
        2. Will be moved to the next meeting. Might be seen in the context of what we will be doing beyond the end of this WG.  
        3. **ACTION: Tom to present on Go_FAIR activities for next months meeting**   


## Next Meeting

**Next Meeting**: Monday, Mar 14th 20:00 UTC (**_chair_**:Paula Andrea Martinez, **_note taker_**:Jen Harrow ). For invitation see events on the[ FAIR4RS WG events](https://www.rd-alliance.org/node/69317/events)


## List of actions

_(as copied from the minutes above)_



1. **Action: Neil to upload subgroup 4 report to Zenodo (DOI has been reserved)**
2. **Action: Neil will email to be sent to subgroup 4 members, in case there are people open to help**
3. **Action: Carlos/Dan need to clean up subgroup 6 doc , will try to do by next meeting**
4. **Action: Carlos will reserve a DOI for the output of subgroup 6**
5. **Action : Michelle will submit the [submission](https://docs.google.com/document/d/16KrE62qjTt-4AXpT-c2OhVDp25eP7-h_mokhelVLM60/edit) to Scientific Data including draft v1.0 of principles**
6. **Action all WG members: should review the subgroup 5 document by the end of the month (28/02)**
7. **Action: Morane to list all outputs and revisit this decision in April**
8. **Action: Paula ask the subgroup 5 members on how they want to proceed (output vs zenodo deposition)**
9. **Action: Morane to submit proposal**
10. **Action Tom to approach the Software Source Code IG to get more information on what this implies**
11. **ACTION: Tom to present on Go_FAIR activities for next months meeting**
