# 14/15 March 2022 FAIR4RS Call

_Your time conversion_



* **Chair**: Paula Andrea Martinez
* **Notes**: Daniel S. Katz
* **Attendees**: Daniel S. Katz, Francoise Genova, Neil Chue Hong, Alexander Struck, Carlos-Martinez-Ortiz, Leyla Jael Castro, Tom Honeyman, Lindsey Anderson
* **Apologies**: Morane Gruenpeter, Fotis Psomopoulos, Jen Harrow  

_Chairing rota_: Morane Gruenpeter (April 2022), Daniel S. Katz (May 2022), Fotis Psomopoulos (June 2022), Michelle (July 2022), Carlos Martinez (August 2022), Neil Chue Hong (September 2022)

**_Previous chair takes notes at next meeting_**


## Quick links



* [FAIR4RS WG](https://www.rd-alliance.org/groups/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg) (RDA) &[ Case statement](https://www.rd-alliance.org/group/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg/case-statement/fair-research-software-wg-case-statement) (RDA)
* [FAIR4RS](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS) (GitHub)
* [Steering committee meeting agendas and minutes](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/tree/master/meetings/2020) (GitHub)


## Agenda



1. Welcome to all new attendees
2. Review action items from previous meeting (Feb 2022)
3. Progress on finalization of RDA recommendation
4. Progress on [submission](https://docs.google.com/document/d/16KrE62qjTt-4AXpT-c2OhVDp25eP7-h_mokhelVLM60/edit) to Scientific Data
5. Update subgroups
    1. Subgroup 5 - Adoption guidelines
    2. Subgroup 6 - Adoption support
    3. Subgroup 7 - Governance
        1. How should the subgroup outputs be shared?
6. What are the Working Group next steps?
7. Past and future activities
8. AOB


## Action items

From the [February](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2022/2022-02-14-Minutes.md) meeting



1. **Action: Neil** to upload subgroup 4 report to Zenodo (DOI has been reserved)
2. **Action: Neil** will email to be sent to subgroup 4 members, in case there are people open to help
3. **Action: Carlos/Dan** need to clean up subgroup 6 doc, will try to do by next meeting. DONE
4. **Action: Carlos** will reserve a DOI for the output of subgroup 6. DONE
5. **Action: Michelle** will submit the[ submission](https://docs.google.com/document/d/16KrE62qjTt-4AXpT-c2OhVDp25eP7-h_mokhelVLM60/edit) to Scientific Data including draft v1.0 of principles - NOT DONE as need v1.0 of principles
6. **Action: all WG members:** should review the subgroup 5 document by the end of the month (28/02). DONE
7. **Action: Morane** to list all outputs and revisit this decision in April
8. **Action: Paula** ask the subgroup 5 members on how they want to proceed (output vs zenodo deposition). DONE - Will be Zenodo
9. **Action: Morane** to submit proposal for VP19 plenary. DONE
10. **Action: Tom** to approach the Software Source Code IG to get more information on what this implies (relates to taking responsibility for maintenance of principles) - DONE
11. **Action: Tom** to present on Go_FAIR activities for next month's meeting


## Notes

Items for this meeting



1. Welcome to all new attendees (3 min, Paula)
    1. Lindsey Anderson from PNNL, works on data integration activities
2. Review action items from previous meeting (3 min, Paula)
    1. **Action: Neil** to upload subgroup 4 report to Zenodo (DOI has been reserved) - **not done -   need to check draft report**
    2. **Action: Neil** will email to be sent to subgroup 4 members, in case there are people open to help - **not done**
    3. **Action: Carlos/Dan** need to clean up subgroup 6 doc, will try to do by next meeting - **done**
    4. **Action: Carlos** will reserve a DOI for the output of subgroup 6. **done**
    5. **Action: Michelle** will submit the[ submission](https://docs.google.com/document/d/16KrE62qjTt-4AXpT-c2OhVDp25eP7-h_mokhelVLM60/edit) to Scientific Data including draft v1.0 of principles - **not done** as need v1.0 of principles
    6. **Action: all WG members** should review the subgroup 5 document by the end of the month (28/02). **done**
    7. **Action: Morane** to list all outputs and revisit this decision in April - done for subgroup 1, still to be done for other subgroups
    8. **Action: Paula** ask the subgroup 5 members on how they want to proceed (output vs zenodo deposition). **done** - will be submitted to Zenodo
    9. **Action: Morane** to submit proposal for VP19 plenary. **done**
    10. **Action: Tom** to approach the Software Source Code IG to get more information on what this implies (relates to taking responsibility for maintenance of principles) - **done**
    11. **Action: Tom** to present on Go_FAIR activities for next month's meeting - **not done**
3. Progress on finalization of RDA recommendation (10 min Neil)
    1. Neil has now gone through all comments in text and resolved.
        1. Thanks in particular to Tom Honeyman.
    2. Todo:
        1. Add any new contributors to author list
        2. Re-crosscheck principles across the tables and text
        3. Draft RDA metadata.
        4. Submit to RDA.
4. Progress on [submission](https://docs.google.com/document/d/16KrE62qjTt-4AXpT-c2OhVDp25eP7-h_mokhelVLM60/edit) to Scientific Data (5 min Michelle?)
    1. Only waiting for text of RDA recommendation to finish this
5. Update subgroups (10 min)
      1. Subgroup 5 - Adoption guidelines
          1. Review is ready, need to decide how to enable community inputs, then upload to Zenodo
      2. Subgroup 6 - Adoption support
          1. Output complete: [https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6258365](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6258365) - share with the whole group, then add as output, see process below for review/publication process
      3. Subgroup 7 - Governance
          1. Concluded: provenance of [decisions](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Q0wEzx6T3S7aqphI8EPlWkibcRXQcLZzMsTem-GOs2o/export?format=pdf) available
          2. Short paragraph of text to be distributed
              1. Add to metadata for submission in some manner, ask secretariat for advice on specifically how
      4. How should the subgroup outputs be shared?
          1. Circulate to group via email, then after some time (2 weeks) post as supporting output on RDA site
      5. How should final output be shared with other sponsors (ReSA, FORCE11)?
          1. **Action: Dan** to draft a short blog post for the ReSA and FORCE11 blogs, pointing to the Zenodo document, saying what we did, we are done, and how people can comment for future versions.
          2. Suggested to add the communities in Zenodo ([FAIR4RS](https://zenodo.org/communities/fair4rs/), [RDA](https://zenodo.org/communities/rda), [ReSA](https://zenodo.org/communities/resa) and FORCE11). **Action: Neil** to provide these communities to Bridget when he submits the RDA recommendation so that she can upload it and include these communities.
              1. Note for RDA non official documents use the [rda-related](https://zenodo.org/communities/rda-related) community
6. What are the Working group next steps? (15 min)
    1. Target hubs where we want our recommendation to appear:
        1. **Action: Tom and Lindsey** Create a FAIR4RS page in fairsharing
        1. **Action: Tom and Chris** Pursue alignment with the implementers network of GO-FAIR? (Tom, Chris?)
    2. Adopters might undertake parallel activities
7. Past and future activities (10 min)
    1. RDA19 [submission ](https://docs.google.com/document/d/14K950WsVw4UT9tHSF1qMtOlUsE2FM0mvFNHbm1Hwc_M/edit)
    2. FAIReScience [submission](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1JU576_Q7yQOQJXCrcxonYLQi1wRPQTzJDIziEd99aaU/edit) to SciDataCon (will include FAIR4RS talk)
    3. Open Science Conference talk presented - slides, videos listed at [https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/CommunityEngagement.md](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/CommunityEngagement.md)
    4. Other events?
8. AOB
    1.


## Next Meeting

**Next Meeting**: Monday, April 11th 20:00 UTC (**_chair_**: Morane Gruenpeter, **_note taker_**: Paula Andrea Martinez). For invitation see events on the[ FAIR4RS WG events](https://www.rd-alliance.org/node/69317/events)


## List of actions

_(as copied from the minutes above)_



1. **Action: Neil** to upload subgroup 4 report to Zenodo (DOI has been reserved), need to check draft report
2. **Action: Neil** will email to be sent to subgroup 4 members, in case there are people open to help
3. **Action: Morane** to list all outputs and revisit this decision in April - done for subgroup 1, still to be done for other subgroups
4. **Action: Neil** to submit v1.0 of RDA recommendation
5. **Action: Michelle** to submit Scientific Data paper
6. **Action: Paula** to upload subgroup 5 report to Zenodo
7. **Action: Carlos** to circulate subgroup 6 report to group, then upload as RDA supporting output
8. **Action: Tom/Neil/Michelle** determine how to incorporate subgroup 8 text into RDA principles (metadata?) and Scientific Data paper
9. **Action: Dan** to draft a short blog post for the ReSA and FORCE11 blogs, pointing to the Zenodo document, saying what we did, we are done, and how people can comment for future versions.
10. **Action: Neil** to provide these communities (FAIR4RS, RDA, ReSA, FORCE11, others?) to Bridget when he submits the RDA recommendation so that she can upload it and include these communities
11. **Action: Tom and Lindsey** Create a FAIR4RS page in fairsharing
12. **Action: Tom and Chris** Pursue alignment with the implementers network of GO-FAIR? (Tom, Chris?)
