# **9/10 May 2022 FAIR4RS Call**

* **Chair**: Daniel S. Katz
* **Notes**: Morane Gruenpeter
* **Attendees**: Francoise Genova, Alexander Struck, Fotis Psomopoulos, Paula Andrea Martinez, Neil Chue Hong, Leyla Jael, Carlos Martinez, Carole Goble
* **Apologies**: Tom Honeyman

_Chairing rota_: Fotis Psomopoulos (June 2022), Carlos Martinez (July 2022),  Neil Chue Hong (August 2022)

**_Previous chair takes notes at next meeting_**


## **Quick links**



* [FAIR4RS WG](https://www.rd-alliance.org/groups/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg) (RDA) &[ Case statement](https://www.rd-alliance.org/group/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg/case-statement/fair-research-software-wg-case-statement) (RDA)
* [FAIR4RS](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS) (GitHub)
* [Steering committee meeting agendas and minutes](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/tree/master/meetings/2020) (GitHub)


## **Agenda**



1. Welcome to all new attendees
2. Review action items from previous meeting (April 2022)
3. Comments on [RDA recommendation](https://doi.org/10.15497/RDA00068)
4. Update subgroups
    1. Subgroup 3 - Finalize
    2. Subgroup 4 - Finalize
    3. Subgroup 6 - Adoption support
    4. Subgroup 7 - Governance
5. RDA plenary:
    1. FAIR4RS - FAIR principles for research software outcomes and governance
    2. Joint session: Supporting FAIR in software
6. What are the Working Group next steps?
7. Past and future activities
8. Update on submission to Scientific Data
9. AOB


## **Action items**

From the [April](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2022/2022-04-11-Minutes.md) meeting



1. **Action: Neil** to upload subgroup 4 report to Zenodo (DOI has been reserved), need to check draft report
    1. Done. The draft has been uploaded and [published to Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/record/4908919)!
    2. The raw data from the survey responses still needs to be added to Zenodo (the reading list has, but not the rest of the survey)
2. **Action: Neil** will email to be sent to subgroup 4 members, in case there are people open to help
    1. Ongoing. Neil needs to send the draft to subgroup members for acceptance of author list.
    2. Go back to subgroup members to get acceptance as authors and roles
3. **Action: Morane** to list all outputs and revisit this decision in April - done for subgroup 1, still to be done for other subgroups. **Morane** will add the subgroup 3 report to the RDA page of supporting outputs
    1. Not yet, will be done this month though
4. **Action: Carlos** to circulate subgroup 6 report to group, then upload as RDA supporting output, he will add the reference to outputs
    1. Update sent last month
    2. Already as an RDA output and a Zenodo deposit
    3. It is done
    4. Zenodo DOI: [https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6258365](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6258365)
    5. RDA output: [https://www.rd-alliance.org/group/fair-research-software-fair4rs-wg/outcomes/fair4rs-adoption-support](https://www.rd-alliance.org/group/fair-research-software-fair4rs-wg/outcomes/fair4rs-adoption-support) 
5. **Action: Neil** to provide these communities (FAIR4RS, RDA, ReSA, FORCE11, others?) to Bridget when he submits the RDA recommendation so that she can upload it and include these communities
    1. Ongoing - Awaiting the end of the comment period when the document will be formally published on Zenodo - are there any other Zenodo communities that should be included? These can be done at any time.
    2. It will be approved soon by RDA Council (likely in May)
6. **Action: Neil** will check with Bridgit, about the RDA acceptance process after the period of review. Also get Bridget to add a line where the recommendation is published (RDA website, Zenodo) stating SSC IG is the place for future discussion
    1. See above
    2. Thank you Paula
7. **Action: Neil** also add the governance text (from subgroup 7) to Zenodo.
    1. Added to the RDA [output page](https://doi.org/10.15497/RDA00068) for the recommendation but Neil doesn’t know if it has been added to the draft Zenodo record for FAIR4RS v1.0 that Bridgit has drafted
    2. ACTION: Neil to check with Bridgit whether the governance text (from subgroup 7) has been added to the draft Zenodo record for FAIR4RS v1.0
8. **Action: all** to review wrap-up [blog post](https://docs.google.com/document/d/10jSyRrmS0fUFgccU5UTqk0lnxdEMwOQOl6sfXRyaIf0/edit)
    1. Done without request for changes
9. **Action: Neil** to add a note to move actions to the SSCIG. - **DONE**
    1. **Done**
10. **Action: Dan** will notify ReSA and FORCE11 that we are done, and that they should publish this blog post and otherwise publicize the output.
    1. awaiting RDA action to accept/finalize principles
11. **Action: Tom and Lindsey** Create a FAIR4RS page in FAIRSharing. Tom and Linsey have met and reviewed the metadata fields. He will send a draft to be reviewed by the group before submission. They suggested Morane to be the owner of the record. Similar record: data citation principles [https://doi.org/10.25504/FAIRsharing.9hynwc](https://doi.org/10.25504/FAIRsharing.9hynwc)
    1. Tom has published a record (pending approval, [raw data here](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1nUu97E53yxpoviO37tOb8A3f4nofQbZt5NVChGR1WyA/edit?usp=sharing)) in FAIRSharing for the FAIR4RS principles. **ACTION: All** to review the raw data and raise any concerns to Morane. Tom can make changes seemingly at any time, hopefully Morane will be able to too.
    2. In order to create links between this and related materials, the leads of each of those related materials should create records in FAIRSharing. This does not take long to do! Tom suggests in particular that, at a minimum, we do this for the definition of Research Software output (subgroup 3), and for the adoption guidelines. But all outputs could have records if need be.

        Alexander created a record for CFF in FAIRSharing to have a hosting place for this ‘standard’. [https://doi.org/10.25504/FAIRsharing.m2NU20](https://doi.org/10.25504/FAIRsharing.m2NU20) 


        Carole: FAIRsharing is an EOSC service, a recognised service of NIH and is also recognised by publishers. FAIRSharing is gaining recognition as an authoritative initiative. Make it as rich as possible.


        How many outputs should we want to put in? 


        Fotis: have one record containing links to all resources


        Françoise: the subgroup’s work do not have the same authoritative acceptance as the principles


        The subgroups’s work is relevant as supplementary materials, this means that one record for the principles is sufficient 


        **ACTION: Carole** to ask Alysson Lister to get advice on this subject (and to CC Morane)


        **ACTION: Morane** to act on this advice, after the review

12. **Action: Tom and Chris** Pursue alignment with the implementers network of GO-FAIR? (Tom, Chris?), Note: Alexander Struck is willing to help contact initiatives, has volunteered to Tom
    1. Chris Erdmann has been pursuing this, and if in attendance can give an update. Chris, Alexander Struck, and Tom agreed that attending and presenting at the [first international FDO conference](https://www.go-fair.org/events/1st-international-fdo-conference/) should be encouraged for any FAIR4RS community members for promoting the FAIR4RS principles.
    2. FAIR implementation network groups: contacting some of the groups will not be as efficient as presenting at the FDO conference- in Leiden & hybrid
    3. **ACTION: Carole** to get a link with more information, will tell Carlos
    4. **ACTION: Carlos** will lead any submission & talk activity
13. **Action: Morane** to coordinate documents, and slides for "FAIR4RS - FAIR principles for research software outcomes and governance" breakout (session 4) at RDA VP
    1. Presenters: 
        1. Dan can participate
        2. Morane
        3. Paula
    2. **ACTION: Morane** to send email to SC about the VP19 preparation
    3. We plan on doing recordings for the presentations with a live discussion
14. **Action: Morane** to verify who submitted the joint session "Supporting FAIR in software" (breakout session 5) at RDA VP and what we should prepare for this session
    1. Scholix people, Tom is involved
    2. Neil can participate
    3. Leyla can help (it is doable)
    4. **ACTION: Morane** to contact Tom and Rachel from Scholix
15. **Action: Paula** to add the second consultation to Zenodo (store the community response as a supplementary output of the FAIR4RS group on the RDA page). 
    1. Not done yet. Planned for next month.


## **Notes**

Items for this meeting



1. Welcome to all new attendees (4 min, Dan)
    1. **ACTION**: Figure out the zoom account for next time : Done
    2. No new attendees
2. Review action items from previous meeting (30 min, Dan)
3. Comments on [RDA recommendation](https://doi.org/10.15497/RDA00068) (in review of previous actions)
    1. Zenodo communities - what communities should the published recommendation be included in? Suggestions were due by April 22nd.
        1. FAIR4RS [https://zenodo.org/communities/fair4rs/](https://zenodo.org/communities/fair4rs/)
        2. ReSA [https://zenodo.org/communities/resa](https://zenodo.org/communities/resa) 
        3. RDA [https://zenodo.org/communities/rda](https://zenodo.org/communities/rda) 
        4. FORCE11 community now created - thanks Paula
    2. **Action: Neil** will check with Bridgit, about the RDA acceptance process after the period of review. Also get Bridget to add a line where the recommendation is published (RDA website, Zenodo) stating SSC IG is the place for future discussion
        1. Suggested line is “The FAIR4RS Working Group has now completed. Discussion of the FAIR Principles for Research Software should be directed to the RDA Software Source Code Interest Group as the maintenance body for the principles.”
4. Update subgroups (in review of previous actions)
    1. Subgroup 3 - finalize docs
    2. Subgroup 4 - finalize docs - done (except for potential email issue that Neil needs to check on subgroup members on) - **ACTION: Neil** to finish this.
    3. Subgroup 6 - Adoption support
        1. Complete: [https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6258365](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6258365), Carlos to upload to RDA outputs this month
    4. Subgroup 7 - Governance
        1. Added to the RDA submission and also to the blogpost.
        2. **Action: Neil **also add the governance text to Zenodo.
    5. How should final output be shared with other sponsors (ReSA, FORCE11) (5 min Dan)

        Dan drafted a short [blog post](https://docs.google.com/document/d/10jSyRrmS0fUFgccU5UTqk0lnxdEMwOQOl6sfXRyaIf0/edit) for the wrap up, and shared ReSA and FORCE11 blogs, pointing to the Zenodo document, saying what we did, we are done, and how people can comment for future versions

* **Action: all** to review blog-post 
* **Action: Neil** to add a note to move actions to the SSCIG. 
* **Action: Dan** will notify ReSA and FORCE11 that we are done, and that they should publish this blog post and otherwise publicize the output.
5. RDA plenary (20–23 June 2022, Seoul, South Korea & virtual) (in review of previous actions):
    1. FAIR4RS - FAIR principles for research software outcomes and governance (breakout 4 - [Check the event time in your time zone](https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?msg=RDA+Plenary+Breakout+session+4&iso=20220622T2330&p1=%3A&ah=1&am=30))
        1. [Collaborative notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1iH7V6e_O4OqDIs1iwWnPtlnyWJOQwM4Te0kLfD-Y6Is/edit?usp=sharing): Talk about the outcome, examples, and governance. 
        2. There is still a clash of the SSCIG in Breakout 3, Morane suggested to postpone this session for the next plenary 
        3. **Action: Morane** to coordinate documents, and slides 
        4. Comments about the way to make resources from the session available, maybe we record parts of it and publish the slides.
    2. Joint session: Supporting FAIR in software (Breakout 5 - [Check the event time in your time zone](https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?msg=RDA+Plenary+Breakout+session+5&iso=20220622T05&p1=1440&ah=1&am=30))
        1. **Action: Morane** to verify who submitted the joint session and what we should prepare for this session.
6. What are the Working group next steps? (in review of actions)
    1. Paula: question about storing the community response as a supplementary output of the FAIR4RS group on the RDA page. 
        1. **Action: Paula** to add the second consultation to Zenodo. (try)
7. News on [submission](https://docs.google.com/document/d/16KrE62qjTt-4AXpT-c2OhVDp25eP7-h_mokhelVLM60/edit) to Scientific Data (1 min, Michelle?)
    1. It is submitted: “Introducing the FAIR Principles for research software” (reference number: SDATA-22-00309)
8. Other past and future activities (10 min, Dan)
    1. We should meet in June and decide if we are meeting after June
    2. Use the plenary as the final event
    3. Transfer activity to SSC IG
    4. Francoise and Morane to present group results (in French) at RDA France (at a time that works for Eastern Canada as well)
        1. **<span style="text-decoration:underline;">ACTION: Françoise</span>** to schedule with Morane the RDA France event
9. AOB (10 min)
    1. **ACTION: Fotis** to create a zoom link for next meeting to send in the WG event post
    2. **ACTION: Dan** to put minutes in GitHub


## **Next Meeting**

**Next Meeting**: Monday, June 13th 20:00 UTC (**_chair_**: Fotis Psomopoulos, **_note taker_**: should be Daniel S. Katz, but he won't be available). For invitation see events on the[ FAIR4RS WG events](https://www.rd-alliance.org/node/69317/events)


## **List of actions**

_(as copied from the minutes above)_



1. Subgroup 3
    1. **ACTION: Morane** will add the subgroup 3 report to the RDA page of supporting outputs
2. Subgroup 4
    1. The raw data from the survey responses still needs to be added to Zenodo (the reading list has, but not the rest of the survey)
    2. Go back to subgroup members to get acceptance as authors and roles, perhaps leading to a new version.
    3. **ACTION: Neil** to do this
3. Wrapping up principles
    1. Neil provided communities (FAIR4RS, RDA, ReSA, FORCE11, others?) to Bridget when he submitted the RDA recommendation so that she can upload it and include these communities
    2. Final version 1.0 of principles to be approved soon by RDA Council (likely in May)
    3. **ACTION: Neil** to check with Bridgit whether the governance text (from subgroup 7) has been added to the draft Zenodo record for FAIR4RS v1.0
    4. **ACTION: Dan** to notify ReSA and FORCE11 that we are done, and that they should publish this [blog post](https://docs.google.com/document/d/10jSyRrmS0fUFgccU5UTqk0lnxdEMwOQOl6sfXRyaIf0/edit) and otherwise publicize the output.
        1. awaiting RDA action to accept/finalize principles
4. FAIRSharing
    1. **ACTION: Carole** to ask Alysson Lister to get advice on content for the FAIR4RS page in FAIRSharing (and to CC Morane) - **Done**
        1. Current draft of record is pending approval, [raw data here](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1nUu97E53yxpoviO37tOb8A3f4nofQbZt5NVChGR1WyA/edit?usp=sharing)
        2. Advice: Yes, we've seen the record in FAIRsharing at [https://fairsharing.org/4100](https://fairsharing.org/4100), it looks great! And you presume correctly, the RDA's FAIR4RS guideline would be considered a singular standard, and the documents you describe should be linked to the record.
            1. Does the associated document describe the standard or its development and is published, e.g. zenodo DOIs, or journal articles? Please add them in the "Publications" tab in the edit interface
            2. Does the associated document constitute a webpage or pages that provide supporting information or descriptions of the standard? Then please add them in the "Licences and Support Links" tab as supporting information.
    2. **ACTION: All** to review the raw data and raise any concerns to Morane. Tom can make changes seemingly at any time, hopefully Morane will be able to too.
    3. **ACTION: Morane** to act on this advice, after the review
5. [First international FDO conference](https://www.go-fair.org/events/1st-international-fdo-conference/)
    1. **ACTION: Carole** to get a link to the event with more information, to tell Carlos
    2. **ACTION: Carlos** to lead any submission & talk activity re FAIR4RS, with support from all
6. RDA VP19
    1. **ACTION: Morane** to coordinate documents, and slides for "FAIR4RS - FAIR principles for research software outcomes and governance" breakout (session 4) at RDA VP
        1. **ACTION: Morane** to send email to SC about the VP19 preparation
    2. **ACTION: Morane** to verify who submitted the joint session "Supporting FAIR in software" (breakout session 5) at RDA VP and what we should prepare for this session
        1. **ACTION: Morane** to contact Tom and Rachel from Scholix
7. **ACTION: Paula** to add the second consultation to Zenodo. 
8. **ACTION: Fotis** to create a zoom link for next meeting to send in the WG event post
9. **ACTION: Dan** to put minutes from this meeting in GitHub - **Done**
