# **13/14 June 2022 FAIR4RS Call**

* **Chair**: Fotis Psomopoulos
* **Notes**: Morane Gruenpeter
* **Attendees**: Paula Martinez, Francoise Genova, Alexander Struck, Neil Chue Hong, Leyla Castro, Tovo Rabemanantsoa
* **Apologies**: Carlos Martinez, Dan Katz

**_Previous chair takes notes at next meeting_**


## **Quick links**


* [FAIR4RS WG](https://www.rd-alliance.org/groups/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg) (RDA) &[ Case statement](https://www.rd-alliance.org/group/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg/case-statement/fair-research-software-wg-case-statement) (RDA)
* [FAIR4RS](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS) (GitHub)
* [Steering committee meeting agendas and minutes](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/tree/master/meetings/2020) (GitHub)


## **Agenda**


1. Welcome to all new attendees
2. Review action items from previous meeting (May 2022)
3. Comments on [RDA recommendation](https://doi.org/10.15497/RDA00068)
4. Update subgroups
    1. Subgroup 3 - Finalize
    2. Subgroup 4 - Finalize
    3. Subgroup 6 - Adoption support
    4. Subgroup 7 - Governance
5. RDA plenary:
    1. FAIR4RS - FAIR principles for research software outcomes and governance
    2. Joint session: Supporting FAIR in software
6. What are the Working Group next steps?
7. Past and future activities
8. Update on submission to Scientific Data
9. AOB


## **Action items**

From the [April](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2022/2022-05-09-Minutes.md) meeting

1. Subgroup 3
  - **ACTION Morane** will add the subgroup 3 report to the [RDA page of supporting outputs](https://www.rd-alliance.org/group/fair-research-software-fair4rs-wg/outcomes/defining-research-software-controversial-discussion) - _**DONE**_
2. Subgroup 4
  - The raw data from the survey responses still needs to be added to Zenodo (the reading list has, but not the rest of the survey)
  - Go back to subgroup members to get acceptance as authors and roles, perhaps leading to a new version.
  - **ACTION Neil**: to do this
    - First part is a blocker
3. Wrapping up principles
  - Neil provided communities (FAIR4RS, RDA, ReSA, FORCE11, others?) to Bridget when he submitted the RDA recommendation so that she can upload it and include these communities
  - Final version 1.0 of principles to be approved soon by RDA Council (likely in May)
  - **ACTION Neil**: to check with Bridgit whether the governance text (from subgroup 7) has been added to the draft Zenodo record for FAIR4RS v1.0 - _**DONE**_
  - **ACTION Dan**: to notify ReSA and FORCE11 that we are done, and that they should publish this blog post and otherwise publicize the output.
    - awaiting RDA action to accept/finalize principles
    - **(new) ACTION Fotis**: check with Dan if done
4. FAIRSharing
  - **ACTION Carole**: to ask Alysson Lister to get advice on content for the FAIR4RS page in FAIRSharing (and to CC Morane) - Done
  Current draft of record is pending approval, raw data here - _**DONE**_
    - Advice: Yes, we've seen the record in FAIRsharing at https://fairsharing.org/4100, it looks great! And you presume correctly, the RDA's FAIR4RS guideline would be considered a singular standard, and the documents you describe should be linked to the record.
      - Does the associated document describe the standard or its development and is published, e.g. zenodo DOIs, or journal articles? Please add them in the "Publications" tab in the edit interface
      - Does the associated document constitute a webpage or pages that provide supporting information or descriptions of the standard? Then please add them in the "Licences and Support Links" tab as supporting information.
  - **ACTION all**: to review the raw data and raise any concerns to Morane. Tom can make changes seemingly at any time, hopefully Morane will be able to too. - _**DONE**_
  - **ACTION Morane**: to act on this advice, after the review  - _**Mostly DONE**_
    - A few things to be done on the record. Morane has access now to the record (from Tom) - remaining to add the links to the other outputs. The recommendation was to add all information relevant to the FAIR4RS Recommendations Record as link (incl supporting outputs). This will be part of the maintenance of the WG
      - Alexander: there is an issue with the author metadata for the DOI 10.15497/RDA00068  It does not reflect the authors listed on the resolved page.
      - Who are the authors for the FAIRsharing record?
        - Morane: Actually the record only keeps the contact point. The metadata will be rechecked to ensure that everything is fine.
5. First [international FDO conference](https://www.go-fair.org/events/1st-international-fdo-conference/)
  - **ACTION Carole**: to get a link to the event with more information, to tell Carlos  - _**DONE**_
  - **ACTION Carlos**: to lead any submission & talk activity re FAIR4RS, with support from all  - _**WIP**_
6. RDA VP19
  - **ACTION Morane**: to coordinate documents, and slides for "FAIR4RS - FAIR principles for research software outcomes and governance" breakout (session 4) at RDA VP  - _**DONE**_
    - **ACTION Morane**: to send email to SC about the VP19 preparation   - _**DONE**_
  - **ACTION Morane**: to verify who submitted the joint session "Supporting FAIR in software" (breakout session 5) at RDA VP and what we should prepare for this session   - _**DONE**_
    - **ACTION Morane**: to contact Tom and Rachel from Scholix   - _**DONE**_
7. **ACTION Paula**: to add the second consultation to Zenodo. Done: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6637920   - _**DONE**_
8. **ACTION Fotis**: to create a zoom link for next meeting to send in the WG event post  - _**DONE**_
9. **ACTION Dan**: to put minutes from this meeting in GitHub  - _**DONE**_


## **Notes**

Items for this meeting


1. Welcome to all new attendees (4 min, Fotis)
  -no new attendees (Tovo Rabemanantsoa came back after a long time away)
2. Review action items from previous meeting (10 min, Fotis)
3. Comments on [RDA recommendation](https://doi.org/10.15497/RDA00068) (in review of previous actions)
  - This should have been completed. Are there any outstanding actions?
  - Neil: publication completed
  - **ACTION all**: to verify the card
  - **ACTION Dan**: to send accepted report card
  - The doi2bib (and other tools) appear to truncate the list of authors, despite the fact that the metadata appears to be complete both on RDA as well as on zenodo. Examples:
    - [doi2bib](https://www.doi2bib.org/bib/10.15497/RDA00068)
    - [OAI 2.0 Request Results (zenodo.org)](https://zenodo.org/oai2d?verb=GetRecord&metadataPrefix=oai_datacite4&identifier=oai:zenodo.org:6623556)
    - [FAIR Principles for Research Software (FAIR4RS Principles) | Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/record/6623556/export/hx#.Yqecn6FBy3B)
  - **ACTION (beyond the remit of this WG)**: review the citation information in BibTeX export on Zenodo and see if can be fixed
  - **ACTION Paula**: check any other missing names or spelling mistakes
  - **ACTION Paula**: to send email to Bridget fix Alexander’s name
3. Update subgroups (in review of previous actions)
  - Subgroup 3 - closed/finalized.
  - Subgroup 4 - closed/finalized
  - Subgroup 6 - finalized. To be presented at the VP19
  - Subgroup 7- finalized. To be presented at the VP19
4. RDA plenary (20–23 June 2022, Seoul, South Korea & virtual) (in review of previous actions):
  - FAIR4RS - FAIR principles for research software outcomes and governance (breakout 4 - [Check the event time in your time zone](https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?msg=RDA+Plenary+Breakout+session+4&iso=20220622T2330&p1=%3A&ah=1&am=30) between Tuesday and Wednesday 21-22)
    - [Collaborative notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1iH7V6e_O4OqDIs1iwWnPtlnyWJOQwM4Te0kLfD-Y6Is/edit?usp=sharing): Talk about the outcome, examples, and governance.
    - [FAIR4RS - FAIR principles for research software outcomes and governance](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1xuBYBBDnpVBd9UcxNgtYfSZ7MB6EXYL763AtoKRpMwg/edit?usp=sharing)
    - [VP19__FAIR4RS Slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1tgyz5Z08badki5blRVRGmCdXOtmkhTnzwVDTjofRcT4/edit?usp=sharing)
    - Paula, Dan and Neil will be presenting live. Neil will also do a recording before the session.
    - **ACTION Fotis/all**: review the material by the end of this week
    - Francoise: Do you plan to accept questions (or having people asking on chat)
    - Even if we have no questions, we’ll have ample time to discuss
    - We’ll be inviting people to add their questions on chat, as well as contribute to the questions on the gdoc.
    - Shall we ask additional questions about adopting the recommendations? Not at this stage - this might be better fitted to later sessions (e.g. within the SSC IG)
  - Joint session: [Supporting FAIR in software](https://www.rd-alliance.org/joint-session-supporting-fair-software) (Breakout 5 - [Check the event time in your time zone](https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?msg=RDA+Plenary+Breakout+session+5&iso=20220622T05&p1=1440&ah=1&am=30))
    - Morane has emailed Rachael Lammey about the session
    - Rachael has been in contact with Neil and Dan. The question is on whether there are items that we’d like to present.
    - **ACTION Neil**: will be emailing Rachael about adding the references to FAIR4RS.
5. What are the Working group next steps? (in review of actions)
  - This might be our last call as a steering committee
  - Going into maintenance into the SSC IG
  - **ACTION Neil**: We need to inform Bridget about going into maintenance under the SSC IG
  - **ACTION Morane**: update the RDA page about this
  - **ACTION Paula**: will send an email to the members, thanking them for their contributions - after the blogpost is uploaded.
6. News on submission to Scientific Data - reference number: SDATA-22-00309 (1 min, Michelle?)
  - ACTION Fotis: Email Michelle about the article.
7. Submission to the [FAIR Digital Object conference](https://www.fdo2022.org/) (deadline is next week)
  - Carlos is drafting the submission, comments/feedback are welcome https://docs.google.com/document/d/1nyPm4jGUXMIzsPIjZf49VK9HxklPZb7PPoSibG-LVEk/edit?usp=sharing
  - **ACTION all**: Review and provide feedback (ideally by the end of this week)
8. Other past and future activities (10 min, Fotis)
  - We should meet in June and decide if we are meeting after June
  - This is the last call
  - Use the plenary as the final event
  - Transfer activity to SSC IG - maintenance group
9. AOB (10 min)
  - Last words on the
  - French translation of the FAIR4RS principles
  - **ACTION Tovo**: to send email to Morane to join efforts



## **Next Meeting**

_**No Next Meeting**_ - this is the last SC call. The final update will be provided during the FAIR4RS Session in RDA P19


## **List of actions**

_(as copied from the minutes above)_

1. Subgroup 4
  - **ACTION Neil**: To add the raw data from the survey responses to Zenodo (the reading list has, but not the rest of the survey). Go back to subgroup members to get acceptance as authors and roles, perhaps leading to a new version.
2. **ACTION Dan**: to notify ReSA and FORCE11 that we are done, and that they should publish this [blog post](https://docs.google.com/document/d/10jSyRrmS0fUFgccU5UTqk0lnxdEMwOQOl6sfXRyaIf0/edit) and otherwise publicize the output. **ACTION Fotis**: check with Dan if done
3. Actions around the [RDA recommendation](https://doi.org/10.15497/RDA00068)
  - **ACTION All** to verify the card
  - **ACTION Dan** to send accepted report card
  - **ACTION Paula**: check any other missing names or spelling mistakes
  - **ACTION Paula**: to send email to Bridget fix Alexander’s name
4. **ACTION all**: review the RDA P19 FAIR4RS session material by the end of this week
5. **ACTION Neil**: will be emailing Rachael about adding the references to FAIR4RS.
6. **ACTION Neil**: We need to inform Bridget about going into maintenance under the SSC IG
7. **ACTION Morane**: update the RDA page about the closing of the WG
8. **ACTION Paula**: will send an email to the members, thanking them for their contributions - after the blogpost is uploaded.
9. **ACTION Fotis**: Email Michelle about the article.
10. **ACTION all**: Review and provide feedback (ideally by the end of this week) for the [FAIR Digital Object conference](https://www.fdo2022.org/) [abstract](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1nyPm4jGUXMIzsPIjZf49VK9HxklPZb7PPoSibG-LVEk/edit?usp=sharing)
11. **ACTION Tovo** to send email to Morane to join efforts
