# 10/11 January 2022 2021 FAIR4RS Call

_[Your time conversion](https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?msg=FAIR4RS+May+committee+meeting&iso=20210510T20&p1=1440)_


* **Chair**: Leyla Jael Castro
* **Notes**: Neil Chue Hong
* **Attendees**: Francoise Genova, Michelle Barker, Fotis Psomopoulos, Daniel S. Katz, Jen Harrow, Morane Gruenpeter
* **Apologies**: Paula Andrea Martinez, Carlos Martinez

_Chairing rota_: Leyla Jael Castro (Jan 2022), Jen Harrow (Feb 2022), Morane Gruenpeter (March 2022), Paula Andrea Martinez (April 2022), Daniel S. Katz (May 2022), Fotis Psomopoulos (June 2022), Michelle (July 2022), Carlos Martinez (August 2022), Neil Chue Hong (September 2022)

**_Previous chair takes notes at next meeting_**


## Quick links



* [FAIR4RS WG](https://www.rd-alliance.org/groups/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg) (RDA) &[ Case statement](https://www.rd-alliance.org/group/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg/case-statement/fair-research-software-wg-case-statement) (RDA)
* [FAIR4RS](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS) (GitHub)
* [Steering committee meeting agendas and minutes](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/tree/master/meetings/2020) (GitHub)


## Agenda



1. Welcome to all new attendees
2. Review action items from[ previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2021/2021-12-13-Minutes.md#list-of-actions)
3. Progress on finalisation of RDA recommendation
4. Progress on [submission](https://docs.google.com/document/d/16KrE62qjTt-4AXpT-c2OhVDp25eP7-h_mokhelVLM60/edit) to Scientific Data
    - Current version of principles needs to be submitted before we can submit
5. Update subgroups
    - Subgroup 5 - Adoption guidelines
    - Subgroup 6 - Adoption support
    - Subgroup 7 - Governance
6. Past and future activities
7. AOB


## Action items

From the [December meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2021/2021-12-13-Minutes.md)



1. **ACTION Neil**: upload subgroup 4 report to Zenodo (DOI has been reserved) carry on report
2. **ACTION Carlos**: will upload the December minutes to [GH](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2021/2021-12-13-Minutes.md)


## Notes

Items for this meeting

1. Welcome to all new attendees
    - Everyone has attended a meeting before.
2. Review action items from [previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2021/2021-12-13-Minutes.md)
    - **ACTION Neil** upload subgroup 4 report to Zenodo (DOI has been reserved) carry on report
      - Neil ran out of time before the break :-(
    - **ACTION Carlos** will upload the December minutes to GH
      - **Done** - Pull Request has been approved

3. Progress on finalisation of RDA recommendation
    - The principles have been split into a [separate document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1bo7wosprdzdVYhJBqJUkJmXbM4frB9cpkK_aLOZWsYs/edit#).
    - Comments from drafting group members have been added, there is still some restructuring of the explanatory text to be done (Interoperable and Reusable, in particular)
    - Neil would like to have it ready before next (February) meeting
    - Useful input would be to pick a principle and aim to improve the explanatory text in line with Tom’s suggested structure by 28 January

4. Progress on [submission](https://docs.google.com/document/d/16KrE62qjTt-4AXpT-c2OhVDp25eP7-h_mokhelVLM60/edit) to Scientific Data
  - Current version of principles needs to be submitted before we can submit
  - Michelle has written to Susanna to query whether the RDA principles need to be submitted (and a preprint available) before the Scientific Data paper can be submitted.
  - Useful input would be to add suggested text to any incomplete sections
  - **ACTION Neil**: send an email to group asking for contributions to RDA Recommendation and Scientific Data paper (as noted above)

5. Update subgroups
    1. Subgroup 5 - Adoption guidelines
        - Michelle has added some comments but otherwise not much movement over the break.
        - **ACTION Leyla**: will call for a meeting with co-chairs
    2. Subgroup 6 - Adoption support
        - Groups have been working but not yet in a position where there is a clear sense of next steps.
        - Carlos has been leading the communications, so
        - **ACTION Dan**: will need to understand whether anything has been communicated back.
    3. Subgroup 7 - Governance
        - Qian and Tom had gathered input from members in Google Docs and had received a lot of feedback on the questions. Qian and Tom are going to take this to draft the report, but there has not been any update since the end of the break
6. Past and future activities
    1. [FAIReScience workshop](https://researchsoft.github.io/FAIReScience/) & output (We said: "From the talks, questions and discussions, we plan a white paper to be written after the workshop, with workshop speakers and attendees as authors.")
        - Do we know if any of the speakers have requested to contribute to a white paper? We don’t believe that this is the case
        - Decision is to not pursue this further.
    2. [RDA Call for Proposals](https://www.rd-alliance.org/rdas-19th-plenary-call-sessions) by February 26th
        - What would the purpose of the session be?
            - Showcasing the adoption examples from group 6?
            - Would these people be at RDA / pay to register
            - Introducing / status of the roadmap work?
            - ReSA facilitation support for this ends before the next RDA Plenary
            - Things from Subgroup 7?
            - General update on FAIR4RS - what are the next steps (where to point people to, after the work here wraps-up)
        - Discuss and draft proposal at the next FAIR4RS meeting

7. AOB
    - For info only: Neil mentioned FAIR4RS in his keynote for the Helmholtz Information and Data Science Academy [Virtual Conference](https://hopin.com/events/hida-virtual-annual-conference)
    - **ACTION Fotis**: will upload the January minutes to GitHub


## Next Meeting

**Next Meeting**: Monday, February 8th 20:00 UTC (**_chair_**: Jen Harrow, **_note taker_**: Leyla Jael Castro). For invitation see events on the [FAIR4RS WG events](https://www.rd-alliance.org/node/69317/events)


## List of actions

_(as copied from the minutes above)_

1. **ACTION Neil**: upload subgroup 4 report to Zenodo (DOI has been reserved)
2. **ACTION Neil**: send an email to group asking for contributions to RDA Recommendation and Scientific Data paper (as noted above)
3. **ACTION Leyla**: will call for a meeting with subgroup 5 co-chairs
4. **ACTION Dan**: will need to understand whether anything has been communicated back.
5. **ACTION Fotis**: will upload the January minutes to GitHub
