# 11/12 April 2022 FAIR4RS Call

* **Chair**: Morane Gruenpeter,
* **Notes**: Paula Andrea Martinez
* **Attendees**: Morane Gruenpeter, Paula Andrea Martinez, Fotis Psomopoulos, Carlos Martinez, Dan Katz, Neil Chue Hong, Malin Sandstrom, Alexander Struck, Leyla Jael Castro, Andreas Czerniak, Line Pouchard, Lindsey Anderson, Brian Corrie, 
* **Apologies**:  Michelle Barker, Jen Harrow

_Chairing rota_: Daniel S. Katz (May 2022), Fotis Psomopoulos (June 2022), Carlos Martinez (July 2022),  Neil Chue Hong (August 2022)

**_Previous chair takes notes at next meeting_**


## Quick links

* [FAIR4RS WG](https://www.rd-alliance.org/groups/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg) (RDA) &[ Case statement](https://www.rd-alliance.org/group/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg/case-statement/fair-research-software-wg-case-statement) (RDA)
* [FAIR4RS](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS) (GitHub)
* [Steering committee meeting agendas and minutes](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/tree/master/meetings/2020) (GitHub)


## Agenda

1. Welcome to all new attendees
2. Review action items from previous meeting (March 2022)
3. Comments on [RDA recommendation](https://doi.org/10.15497/RDA00068)
4. Progress on [submission](https://docs.google.com/document/d/16KrE62qjTt-4AXpT-c2OhVDp25eP7-h_mokhelVLM60/edit) to Scientific Data
5. Update subgroups
    1. Subgroup 5 - Adoption guidelines
    2. Subgroup 6 - Adoption support
    3. Subgroup 7 - Governance
    4. How should group outputs be shared?
6. RDA plenary:
    5. FAIR4RS - FAIR principles for research software outcomes and governance
    6. Joint session: Supporting FAIR in software
7. What are the Working Group next steps?
8. Past and future activities
9. AOB


## Action items

From the [March](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2022/2022-03-14-Minutes.md#list-of-actions) meeting

1. **Action: Neil** to upload subgroup 4 report to Zenodo (DOI has been reserved), need to check draft report
    1. Ongoing
2. **Action: Neil** will email to be sent to subgroup 4 members, in case there are people open to help
    2. Ongoing, Neil will wrap that up now 
3. **Action: Morane** to list all outputs and revisit this decision in April - done for subgroup 1, still to be done for other subgroups. Morane will add the subgroup 3 report
4. **Action: Neil** to submit v1.0 of RDA recommendation - **DONE**
5. **Action**: **Michelle** to submit Scientific Data paper - **DONE**
6. **Action**: **Paula** to upload subgroup 5 report to Zenodo  - **DONE**
7. **Action**: **Carlos** to circulate subgroup 6 report to group, then upload as RDA supporting output, he will add the reference to outputs
8. **Action**: **Tom/Neil/Michelle** determine how to incorporate subgroup 7 text into RDA principles (metadata?) and Scientific Data paper - **DONE (for Sci Data paper by Michelle and by Neil for RDA principles)**
9. **Action: Dan** to draft a short blog post for the ReSA and FORCE11 blogs, pointing to the Zenodo document, saying what we did, we are done, and how people can comment for future versions. - **DONE** (drafting, that is, now waiting for the RDA approval of the principles so that the blog can be published)
10. **Action: Neil** to provide these communities (FAIR4RS, RDA, ReSA, FORCE11, others?) to Bridget when he submits the RDA recommendation so that she can upload it and include these communities
    3. Ongoing - Awaiting the end of the comment period when the document will be formally published on Zenodo - are there any other Zenodo communities that should be included? These can be done at any time.
11. **Action: Tom and Lindsey** Create a FAIR4RS page in fairsharing. Tom and Linsey have met and reviewed the metadata fields. He will send a draft to be reviewed by the group before submission. They suggested Morane to be the owner of the record. [https://doi.org/10.25504/FAIRsharing.9hynwc](https://doi.org/10.25504/FAIRsharing.9hynwc)
12. **Action: Tom and Chris** Pursue alignment with the implementers network of GO-FAIR? (Tom, Chris?), Note: Alexander Struck is willing to help contact initiatives, has volunteered to Tom


## Notes

Items for this meeting

1. Welcome to all new attendees (3 min, Morane)
2. Review action items from previous meeting (3 min, Morane)
3. Comments on [RDA recommendation](https://doi.org/10.15497/RDA00068) (10 min, Neil)
    1. Submitted March 22 and still under the one month period review
    2. How to address comments and when? (currently 2 comments)
        1. Neil has taken a look at these comments and will respond
        2. Both comments are essentially about the FAIR4RS Principles not giving more concrete guidance or current standards not giving enough information to implement the principles - something to discuss in the blog post to give pointers about the way forward?
    3. Zenodo communities - what communities should the published recommendation be included in? Suggestions by April 22nd.
        3. FAIR4RS [https://zenodo.org/communities/fair4rs/](https://zenodo.org/communities/fair4rs/)
        4. ReSA [https://zenodo.org/communities/resa](https://zenodo.org/communities/resa) 
        5. RDA [https://zenodo.org/communities/rda](https://zenodo.org/communities/rda) 
        6. No FORCE11 community? (not yet but waiting to hear back from FORCE11)
    4. **Action: Neil** will check with Bridgit, about the RDA acceptance process after the period of review. Also get Bridget to add a line where the recommendation is published (RDA website, Zenodo) stating SSC IG is the place for future discussion
        7. Suggested line is “The FAIR4RS Working Group has now completed. Discussion of the FAIR Principles for Research Software should be directed to the RDA Software Source Code Interest Group as the maintenance body for the principles.”
4. Progress on [submission](https://docs.google.com/document/d/16KrE62qjTt-4AXpT-c2OhVDp25eP7-h_mokhelVLM60/edit) to Scientific Data (1 min)
    5. It is submitted: “Introducing the FAIR Principles for research software” (reference number: SDATA-22-00309)
5. Update subgroups (10 mins)
    6. Subgroup 5 - Adoption guidelines
        8. Complete, uploaded to Zenodo and [RDA outputs](https://www.rd-alliance.org/group/fair-research-software-fair4rs-wg/outcomes/survey-adoption-guidelines-fair4rs-principles)
    7. Subgroup 6 - Adoption support
        9. Complete: [https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6258365](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6258365), Carlos to upload to RDA outputs this month
    8. Subgroup 7 - Governance
        10. Added to the RDA submission and also to the blogpost.
        11. **Action: Neil **also add the governance text to Zenodo.
    9. How should final output be shared with other sponsors (ReSA, FORCE11) (5 min Dan)
Dan drafted a short [blog post] for the wrap up, and shared ReSA and FORCE11 blogs, pointing to the Zenodo document, saying what we did, we are done, and how people can comment for future versions. 
**Action: all** to review blog-post
**Action: Neil** to add a note to move actions to the SSCIG.
**Action: Dan** will notify ReSA and FORCE11 that we are done, and that they should publish this blog post and otherwise publicize the output.

6. RDA plenary (20–23 June 2022, Seoul, South Korea & virtual) (15 min, Morane):
    10. FAIR4RS - FAIR principles for research software outcomes and governance (breakout 4 - [Check the event time in your time zone](https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?msg=RDA+Plenary+Breakout+session+4&iso=20220622T2330&p1=%3A&ah=1&am=30))
        12. [Collaborative notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1iH7V6e_O4OqDIs1iwWnPtlnyWJOQwM4Te0kLfD-Y6Is/edit?usp=sharing): Talk about the outcome, examples, and governance. 
        13. There is still a clash of the SSCIG in Breakout 3, Morane suggested to postpone this session for the next plenary 
        14. **Action: Morane** to coordinate documents, and slides 
        15. Comments about the way to make resources from the session available, maybe we record parts of it and publish the slides.
    11. Joint session: Supporting FAIR in software (Breakout 5 - [Check the event time in your time zone](https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?msg=RDA+Plenary+Breakout+session+5&iso=20220622T05&p1=1440&ah=1&am=30))
        16. **Action: Morane** to verify who submitted the joint session and what we should prepare for this session.
7. What are the Working group next steps? (10 min)
    12. Neil: question about supplementary output on our group's processes, written in [https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5037157](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5037157) and in an earlier draft of the Scientific Data paper, should we add some version of this to the FAIR4RS outputs page as a supplementary output - we think the answer is no; Dan has now asked RDA to post this as a supplementary output.  If someone wants to write another document about this as well, they can do so and add it as another supplementary output later.
    13. Paula: question about storing the community response as a supplementary output of the FAIR4RS group on the RDA page. 
        17. **Action: Paula** to add the second consultation to Zenodo. (try)
8. AOB
    14. No more other points to discuss, just celebrating the wrap up. 
    15. Thanks to every contributor!


## Next Meeting

**Next Meeting**: Monday, May 9th 20:00 UTC (**_chair_**: Daniel S. Katz, **_note taker_**: Morane Gruenpeter). For invitation see events on the[ FAIR4RS WG events](https://www.rd-alliance.org/node/69317/events)


## List of actions

_(as copied from the minutes above)_

1. **Action: Neil** to upload subgroup 4 report to Zenodo (DOI has been reserved), need to check draft report
    1. Ongoing
2. **Action: Neil** will email to be sent to subgroup 4 members, in case there are people open to help
    2. Ongoing, Neil will wrap that up now 
3. **Action: Morane** to list all outputs and revisit this decision in April - done for subgroup 1, still to be done for other subgroups. Morane will add the subgroup 3 report
4. **Action**: **Carlos** to circulate subgroup 6 report to group, then upload as RDA supporting output, he will add the reference to outputs
5. **Action: Neil** to provide these communities (FAIR4RS, RDA, ReSA, FORCE11, others?) to Bridget when he submits the RDA recommendation so that she can upload it and include these communities
    3. Ongoing - Awaiting the end of the comment period when the document will be formally published on Zenodo - are there any other Zenodo communities that should be included? These can be done at any time.
6. **Action: Tom and Lindsey** Create a FAIR4RS page in fairsharing. Tom and Linsey have met and reviewed the metadata fields. He will send a draft to be reviewed by the group before submission. They suggested Morane to be the owner of the record. [https://doi.org/10.25504/FAIRsharing.9hynwc](https://doi.org/10.25504/FAIRsharing.9hynwc)
7. **Action: Tom and Chris** Pursue alignment with the implementers network of GO-FAIR? (Tom, Chris?), Note: **Alexander Struck** is willing to help contact initiatives, has volunteered to Tom
8. **Action: Neil** will check with Bridgit, about the RDA acceptance process after the period of review. 
9. **Action: Neil** also add the governance text to Zenodo.
10. **Action: all** to review blog-post by Dan
11. **Action: Neil** to add a note to move actions to the SSCIG in the blog-post. 
12. **Action: Dan** to notify ReSA and FORCE11 that we are done, and that they should publish this blog post and otherwise publicize the output..
11. **Action: Morane** to coordinate documents, and slides for VP19
12. **Action: Morane** to verify who submitted the joint session to VP19 and what we should prepare for this session.
13. **Action: Paula** to add the second consultation to Zenodo. (try)
